International Association for the Study of Traditional Environments (IASTE)
 
 
Review
Reviewed Work(s): The Home: Words, Interpretations, Meanings and Environments by
David N. Benjamin and  David Stea
Review by: Jennifer Cousineau
Source: Traditional Dwellings and Settlements Review, Vol. 9, No. 2 (SPRING 1998), pp. 80-
81
Published by: International Association for the Study of Traditional Environments (IASTE)
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/41757688
Accessed: 14-02-2025 08:21 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
International Association for the Study of Traditional Environments (IASTE) is
collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Traditional Dwellings and
Settlements Review
This content downloaded from 193.60.238.225 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:21:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 80 T D S R 9 . 2
 Perhaps Daniel's most valuable contribution to historical
 scholarship is the information he provides on the early difficul-
 ties and subsequent growth of Ohio University, one of the
 town's oldest institutions and largest employers. The growth of
 the university is one of the few stories that distinguishes what
 might otherwise be an unremarkable nineteenth-century histo-
 ry. Daniel is also at his best when he weaves together disparate
 accounts from newspapers, diaries, and other sources to offer
 an engaging picture of Athens' wartime experience, both
 through the eyes of Athens-born soldiers and the community
 back home.
 The book's sweeping scope (which formally spans the
 period from 1800 to 1920, but which actually begins with the
 earliest documented human occupation of the area) is not,
 however, without problems. Daniel makes this extended
 chronology digestible by slicing it into specific segments. But
 his method also tends to sever the narrative in places to make
 it fit the sequence of chapters. For example, in chapter five
 (which focuses on the 1850s) the reader learns that a new rail-
 road is being planned from Columbus to Athens to provide
 access to the coal fields in the nearby Hocking Valley.
 However, it is not until chapter eight - more than ninety
 pages and twenty years later - that the reader discovers this
 line was completed and put into operation.
 The progressive physical, cultural, intellectual, political and
 economic growth of Athens through the nineteenth century sug-
 gests that the town was consistently working to break down its
 isolation. But, according to Daniel, regardless of increases in its
 population, Athens did not truly become a city until the twenti-
 eth century. One might wonder why, then, if Daniel is so intent
 upon documenting Athens' "Village Years" (as indicated by the
 book's subtide), nearly one-third of the book describes life in
 Athens between 1900 and 1920, a period during which Daniel
 claims Athens finally became a city - and an "urbane" one at
 that. But this is a minor point. The book's only real flaw has to
 do with how Daniel has chosen to organize the massive amount
 information he has compiled. Overall, this is a highly readable
 account of the nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century history of
 a midwestern university town. ■
 J. Philip Gruen
 University of California, Berkeley
 The Home: Wordsy Interpretations, Meanings and Enviro
 David N. Benjamin, ed., assisted by David Stea. Avebu
 Publishing House, Aldershot, 1995. 310 pp.
 The first scholarly article on the topic of the home was
 lished in 1678; but, even now, at the end of the twentie
 tury, use of the term is still ambiguous. So claims Dav
 Benjamin, editor of The Home: Words , Interpretations, 
 and Environments. The fifteen chapters in this collectio
 nothing if not confirm Benjamin's claim.
 With the exception of one, all the contributions to t
 book were drawn from a three-day symposium entitled
 Ancient Home and the Modern Industrialized Home," 
 vened in 1992 at the University of Trondheim, Norwa
 organizers of this symposium endeavored to see the top
 ered according to as many disciplinary traditions, conce
 approaches, and methods as possible; and conference p
 included archeologists, sociologists, architects, psycholo
 linguists, anthropologists, geographers and urbanists. 
 tributions chosen for this book display a similar variety
 terms of their approach. They are arranged by sub-sect
 treating the subject by definition, as a tool for cultural 
 pretation, as a reflection of social change, and as a mod
 the future.
 The book opens with an attempt at linguistic definition
 - or perhaps demonstration of the futility of such an attempt.
 Stephen Brink's "Home: The Term and the Concept from a
 Linguistic and Settlement-Historical Viewpoint" was specially
 commissioned for this purpose. Brink traces the word home
 and its variants - ham, heima, hem, and heimr - as they
 appeared in Germanic languages as long as 2,000 years ago.
 Though it is impossible to pin the meaning of these ancient
 terms down exactly, they all relate to ideas about place: among
 them farm, hearth, village, settlement and dwelling. Though
 not stated explicitly, the problem of definition obviously has
 much to do with the subjective use of the word by both indi-
 viduals and groups.
 Of the chapters that follow, that by Amos Rapoport is
 particularly pivotal, because it problematizes the spill-over of
 the term home into the realm of popular culture. Rapoport
 claims that the understanding of the term by researchers has
 been conditioned by its popular usage. Phrases such as "there's
 no place like home" or "you can't go home again" imply a
This content downloaded from 193.60.238.225 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:21:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
 BOOKS 81
 mental state. Others such as "home is where, when you go
 there, they have to let you in" suggest ownership and control.
 The term can also carry intimations of physical and emotional
 comfort, family and relationships, security and possession.
 Rapoport then radically suggests the term is not needed in
 scholarly research at all. He argues that the concept of
 "dwelling," defined as a system of settings, is less laden, and
 consequently much more useful as point of departure for the
 study of relationships of culture, life-style, and social structure.
 Another noteworthy contribution to the book is that by
 Ruth Tringham. She takes readers back through the prehistory
 of Southeastern European settlements in search of the micro-
 history of home. Archeologists, Tringham claims, have not
 written much about homes or home, although they have writ-
 ten considerably about architecture, spatial patterns, buildings,
 dwellings, shelter and houses. Her aim is to expand the arche-
 ological record both quantitatively and qualitatively by asking
 different questions. By viewing material culture as an active
 component of social action, she argues that questions can be
 asked and narratives constructed about individual actors and
 their everyday lives. Such efforts at constructing micro-histo-
 ries of home hold great promise in terms of documenting the
 role of women and other actors long excluded from the prehis-
 torical picture.
 In the final section, Tomas Wilkstroms chapter, "The
 Home and Housing Modernization," looks at ways in which
 the concept and reality of home have been constructed by
 users of dwellings. In the late 1980s Wilkstrom interviewed
 the inhabitants of several apartment buildings scheduled for
 renewal or "modernization" in Sweden. Drawing on the theo-
 retical framework provided by German phenomenologist Otto
 Friedrich Bollnow in his Mensch und Raum {Man and Space) ,
 Wilkstrom provides vivid oral histories that document the ways
 people create spaces for living; stated otherwise, how they cre-
 ate homes out of housing.
 Conspicuously absent from this collection is more materi-
 al specifically investigating issues of home and gender. This
 topic has been at the center of ongoing debates in a number of
 disciplines over the past three decades, and its omission weak-
 ens what would otherwise be a comprehensive survey. Several
 of the contributions to this volume, among them Rapoport s
 and Tringham's, are outstanding in their invigorating scholarly
 approaches to a concept and subject already well covered but
 by no means exhausted. Yet, despite such 
 extent to which this volume accomplishes m
 ating the complexity of the subject and int
 of approaches is unclear. This volume will 
 those embarking on the study of home fro
 disciplinary or methodological framework
 selves indicate that scholars and professiona
 with the subject have little doubt as t
 Jennifer Cousineau
 University of California , Berkeley
This content downloaded from 193.60.238.225 on Fri, 14 Feb 2025 08:21:02 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
