See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/333521182
Context in Person, Person in Context: A Cultural Psychology Approach to Social–
Personality Psychology. In K. Deaux and M. Snyder (Eds.) The Oxford Handbook
of Personality and Socia...
Chapter · October 2018
DOI: 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780190224837.013.8
CITATION
1
READS
736
2 authors:
Glenn Adams
University of Kansas
122 PUBLICATIONS   4,938 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Tugce Kurtis
University of West Georgia
27 PUBLICATIONS   877 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Glenn Adams on 31 May 2019.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
1 
 
Context in Person, Person in Context: 
A Cultural Psychology Approach to Social-Personality Psychology 
 
Glenn Adams 
 
Tuğçe Kurtiş 
University of Kansas 
 
University of West Georgia 
 
 
Chapter to appear in K. Deauz and M. Snyder (Eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Personality 
and Social Psychology. New York: Oxford University Press.  
2 
 
Abstract  
This chapter describes a cultural psychology approach to social-personality psychology. 
Extending the standard social-psychological emphasis on the importance of context, the first 
section considers the cultural constitution of personal experience. A history of engagement with 
particular cultural affordances shapes a person with an associated set of residual tendencies such 
that what appear to be “personal” dispositions are instead a form of context in person: embodied 
traces of a person’s engagement with ecological structures of mind that continually reconstitute 
the person’s habitual ways of being. Extending an emphasis on importance of subjective 
construal, the second section considers the psychological constitution of cultural worlds. As 
people act on subjective interpretations, their behavior leaves traces on objective realities to 
create a form of person in context: everyday constructions of reality that bear the influence of 
personal activity. In this way, a cultural psychology analysis balances the traditional social 
psychological emphasis on the power of the situation with a restored emphasis on the power of 
the culturally grounded person as (re)constructor of intentional worlds. 
Keywords: action, cultural affordance, ecological, habitus, identity, intentional world, mutual 
constitution, selfways 
3 
 
Context in Person, Person in Context: 
A Cultural Psychology Approach to Social-Personality Psychology 
 
A cultural psychology aims to develop a principle of intentionality—action responsive 
to and directed at mental objects or representations—by which culturally constituted 
realities (intentional worlds) and reality-constituting psyches (intentional persons) 
continually and continuously make each other up. (Shweder, 1990, pp. 26-27) 
 
 
In this chapter, we approach the guiding theme of this Handbook—the integration of 
social and personality psychology—from a perspective of cultural psychology. Contrary to 
common understandings, the point of a cultural psychology analysis is not merely to examine 
how psychological phenomena vary across cultural settings; instead, a cultural psychology 
analysis highlights how psyche and culture “make each other up” (Shweder, 1990; p. 27). That 
is, a cultural psychology analysis emphasizes the extent to which person-based structures of 
experience that are the focus of most psychological research exist in a dynamic relationship of 
mutual constitution with socially constructed affordances (i.e., qualities of an object or 
environment that allow performance of an action; see Gibson, 1977) embedded in the structure 
of everyday worlds. We apply this cultural psychology framework to provide an account of 
social-personality psychology that balances the traditional social psychological emphasis on “the 
power of the situation” with a restored emphasis on the power of the person as creator of 
intentional worlds (see Gjerde, 2004). 
With its defining focus on the mutual constitution of cultural worlds and psychological 
experience, a cultural psychology analysis extends an earlier discussion of the relationship 
between social and personality psychology by Lee Ross and Richard Nisbett (1991), who 
proposed that the field of social psychology rests on a small set of basic principles.1 The first 
principle, the “power of the situation,” refers to the typically underappreciated extent to which 
subtle contextual features moderate the course of psychological experience. In contrast to the 
general thrust of psychological science and its emphasis on personal dispositions, this principle 
emphasizes environmental regulation of action and experience. The second principle, “the 
importance of subjective construal,” refers to the role of human imagination in the creation of 
meaning from inherently ambiguous stimuli. In contrast to the layperson’s sense of direct access 
to an objective reality (i.e., naive realism), this social-psychological principle emphasizes the 
dynamic construction of experience from typically underspecified, environmental inputs.2 
A cultural psychology analysis elaborates these social-psychological principles by adding 
considerations of history and materiality. Extending “the power of the situation,” one direction of 
the mutual constitution relationship refers to the cultural constitution of psychological 
experience. Psychological development is not simply the natural outgrowth of inborn 
programming or unfolding of genetic potential; instead, it reflects the incorporation and 
embodiment—literally, “taking into the body”—of blueprints for psychological experience 
deposited over historical time in the structure of everyday cultural worlds. The idea here is not a 
weak form of contextualism that emphasizes the “power of the situation” to regulate personal 
experience, but rather a strong form of contextualism in which cultural realities are constitutive 
of psychological experience. In terms of species-typical tendencies, this means that what we 
have come to regard as normal human development would not be possible without the tools or 
scaffolding that socially constructed, historically evolved, cultural affordances provide. In terms 
of individual personalities, this means that a history of engagement with particular sets of 
4 
 
cultural affordances shapes a person with an associated set of residual tendencies such that what 
appear to be “personal” dispositions are instead a form of context in person: embodied traces of a 
person’s engagement with ecological structures of mind that continually reconstitute the person’s 
habitual ways of being. 
Extending the idea of subjective construal, the other side of this mutual constitution 
relationship refers to the psychological constitution of cultural worlds. Cultural worlds do not 
exist apart from human action; instead, people continually reproduce environmental extensions 
of the person into which they inscribe, objectify, and realize (literally, “make real”; see Berger & 
Luckmann, 1966; Moscovici, 1984) their beliefs and desires. Again, the idea here is not a 
relatively weak form of constructivism that emphasizes the dynamic role of human imagination 
in the interpretation of reality, but rather a strong form of constructivism in which human 
subjectivity is constitutive of everyday realities. As people act on subjective interpretations, their 
behavior leaves traces on objective realities to create a form of person in context: everyday 
constructions of reality that bear the influence of personal activity. One important implication is 
that species-typical human beings do not inhabit anything close to a “just natural” environment, 
Even many settings where humans live “close to nature” are cultural products, shaped by choices 
to preserve or cultivate a “natural” state (see e.g., Adams & Mulligan, 2003). Moreover, what 
appears at first glance to be wilderness apart from human contact often upon further investigation 
reveals influence of human activity, whether temporally distant interventions in the landscape 
due to earlier habitation (e.g., Ferme, 2001; Heckenberger, 2005) or spatially distant activity that 
results in local climate change and related consequences for local ecology. In short, human 
beings are born into and develop within cultural ecologies: everyday worlds of collective design 
that are already structured by human understanding.  
In the sections that follow, we consider the intersection of social and personality 
psychology in terms of both directions of the mutual constitution process. Reflecting the 
emphasis of existing work, the first section of the paper considers the cultural constitution of 
personal experience: the extent to which the structure of persons bears the embodied influence of 
contextual scaffolding. In the second section, we consider the equally important, but typically 
less well articulated, psychological constitution of cultural worlds: the extent to which the 
cultural-ecological context bears the accumulated influence of personal activity.  
 
CONTEXT IN PERSON: 
SOCIOCULTURAL CONSTITUTION OF PSYCHOLOGICAL EXPERIENCE 
One of the most significant developments in social-personality psychology during the 
past two decades has been unprecedented attention to the cultural constitution of psychological 
experience. This work suggests that psychological tendencies observed in the typical experiment 
are not “just so,” but instead reflect the particular cultural-psychological ecologies of the worlds 
in which the science developed. One of the most important statements of this idea is a review of 
cultural variation in constructions of self by Hazel Markus and Shinobu Kitayama (1991). 
Independent Constructions of Self 
Markus and Kitayama (1991) proposed that theory and research in psychological science 
primarily considered (and treated as normative or “just natural”) historically particular patterns 
of experience associated with what they referred to as independent self-construal: an atomistic 
understanding of self as a bounded entity, inherently separate from social and physical context, 
composed of defining or essential attributes abstracted from particular situational performances. 
The key feature of independent self-construal is not devaluation of relational connection, but 
5 
 
instead an experience of such connection—for better or worse—as the secondary, manufactured 
product of inherently separate selves.  
With respect to perception and cognition, research has linked independent constructions 
of self with analytic tendencies to focus attention on properties of people and objects as the 
primary unit of reality (Nisbett, Peng, Choi, & Norenzayan, 2001; see also Kühnen, Hannover, & 
Schubert, 2001; Kühnen & Oyserman, 2002). The experience of self as a bounded entity 
abstracted from context reflects and promotes perceptual tendencies to a focus on discrete 
objects and their defining attributes independent of their background fields (Masuda & Nisbett, 
2001; Nisbett et al., 2001). In turn, the tendency to focus on defining attributes of objects reflects 
and promotes tendencies to understand or explain everyday events with disproportionate 
emphasis on actors’ personal traits or dispositions (i.e., the “fundamental attribution error,” Ross, 
1977; see Cousins, 1989; Miller, 1984). Similarly, the focus on defining properties of bounded 
objects reflects and promotes analytic tendencies of taxonomic categorization, whereby people 
categorize objects on the basis of common attributes (e.g., rather than functional relationship; see 
Nisbett et al., 2001). Finally, perceptual or cognitive tendencies to abstract objects from context 
are associated with analytic reasoning styles whereby people view the world as operating 
according to universal abstract rules and laws (Norenzayan, Smith, Kim, & Nisbett, 2002). 
With respect to motivation, research has linked independent constructions of self with 
promotion-focused tendencies (Higgins, 1996; see also Lee, Aaker, & Gardner, 2000) to express 
authentic dispositions and to pursue opportunities for self-enhancement (Heine, Lehman, 
Markus, & Kitayama, 1999; Kitayama, Markus, Matsumoto, & Norasakkunkit, 1997). 
Independent constructions of self foster motivations to express defining attributes (e.g., beliefs 
and preferences) via acts of disclosure and personal choice (Kim & Sherman, 2007; Savani, 
Markus, & Conner, 2008), to highlight one’s uniqueness (Kim & Markus, 1999), and to 
influence one’s surroundings to fit one’s preferences, goals, or wishes (Morling, Kitayama, & 
Miyamoto, 2002). Likewise, the focus on defining attributes of independent selves reflects and 
promotes an emphasis on cultivation of self-esteem (e.g., Singelis, Bond, Lai, & Sharkey, 1999) 
and a tendency to maintain positively biased self-views (Heine & Hamamura, 2007) via “self-
serving” patterns of memory and attribution (Endo & Meijer, 2004). This motivation to seek self-
enhancement (at the expense of self-improvement) is especially evident in tendencies to persist 
at a task longer after success feedback than failure feedback (Heine et al., 2001). 
With respect to affect and emotion, research has linked independent constructions of self 
to tendencies of experience and expression that highlight positive personal attributes and affirm 
the self as an independent entity (Kitayama, Markus, & Kurokawa, 2010). For example, research 
has associated independent constructions of self with an emphasis on the personal meaning of 
emotional experience (rather than normative or consensual understandings; Mesquita, 2001; 
Oishi, Diener, Scollon, & Biswas-Diener, 2004) and positive evaluation of self-conscious 
emotions (e.g., pride) that signal personal accomplishment (Eid & Diener, 2001). Likewise, 
research has associated independent constructions with a self-indulgent preference for high-
arousal positive affective states (Tsai, 2007). 
Research has also linked independent constructions of self to a set of implications for 
relational and collective belonging. Contrary to stereotypes about solitary, relationship-
disdaining individualists, a cultural psychology perspective suggests that the relevant feature of 
independent constructions is a “promotion-focused” experience of relational belonging as a 
somewhat voluntary, effortful choice of atomistic “free agents” who strive to create connection 
in contexts of inherent separation. Independent constructions of self afford open, uninhibited 
6 
 
pursuit of pleasurable companionship and a sense of freedom both to choose attractive partners 
and to avoid onerous obligations (e.g., to relatives). They resonate strongly with market pricing 
models of relationality (Fiske, 1991) that emphasize a free market of relationship in which 
people are at liberty to choose whether to initiate or dissolve connections. They also resonate 
strongly with equality matching models of relationality (Fiske, 1991) and conceptions of a highly 
disordered “state of nature” in which “all [people] are created equal . . . with unalienable rights 
[that] include . . . liberty and the pursuit of happiness” in mutually rewarding, companionate 
relationship. These conceptions find expression in tendencies for people to report a relatively 
large number of friends (Adams & Plaut, 2003); to report a sense of freedom from enemies 
(Adams, 2005); to emphasize verbally oriented, emotional intimacy as the essence of social 
support (Adams & Kurtiş, 2015); and to rely on self-disclosure as a mechanism for establishing 
intimacy and communion across the intersubjective gap of inherent interpersonal separation 
(Kurtiş & Adams, 2015a; Schug, Yuki, & Maddux, 2010).  
Similarly independent constructions of self afford a voluntaristic experience of collective 
belonging as a product of personal choice that grants people liberty (and requires them) to create 
their own group memberships (Triandis, Bontempo, Villareal, Asai, & Lucca, 1988). The high 
degree of social mobility associated with independent models is associated with a relatively 
limited experience of obligation and high conditionality of group identification (Oishi, Ishii, & 
Lun, 2009), meaning that people feel free to invest in group memberships, or not, to the extent 
that doing so serves their current personal projects. In general, independent constructions of self 
afford a sense of freedom to create a relatively large number of thin connections dependent on 
the extent to which they satisfy personal goals. 
As another manifestation of this relatively thin construction of sociality, Yuki (2003) has 
proposed that independent constructions promote a “common identity” experience of belonging 
(Prentice, Miller, & Lightdale, 1994)—as assimilation to a representation of an identity 
category—that resonates strongly with self-categorization theoretical perspectives (e.g., Turner, 
Hogg, Oakes, Reicher, & Wetherell, 1987). From this perspective, the glue that holds collective 
identity together is not actual connection among people, but instead a sense of imagined 
community (Anderson, 1983) with abstract or hypothetical others in the same category. As we 
note in a later section, this sense of imagined community typically rests on cultural artifacts (e.g., 
monuments, national media, standardized national languages; see Anderson, 1983; Billig, 1995; 
Reicher & Hopkins, 2001) that afford particular constructions of the collective self and convey 
knowledge about prototypical members. 
Interdependent Constructions of Self 
In contrast to the independent constructions of self that inform scientific imagination and 
conceptions of normative, Markus & Kitayama (1991) suggested that the more typical patterns of 
subjectivity in human communities across time and space have been more relational 
understandings of self-in-context that they referred to as interdependent self-construal. One of 
many statements of this idea comes from the Kuranko (Sierra Leone, West Africa) settings 
where one of us (GA) lived for three years while working as a secondary school mathematics 
teacher with the Peace Corps. When discussing what it means to be human, people in Kuranko 
settings often make statements similar to the idea that “One’s birth is like the bird-scaring rope” 
(Jackson, 1982, p. 17). The bird-scaring rope is an agricultural tool that consists of a network of 
rope with bits of metal tied to stakes and stretched back and forth across a field. By tugging from 
a central point, a farmer sets in motion the whole network of rope and produces a cacophony of 
clanking metal that scares marauding birds away from the maturing rice crop. This tool serves as 
7 
 
an apt metaphor for personal experience in many West African settings. People emphasize that 
they do not exist in isolation; rather, their actions reflect the influence of others in the 
community. When one person is agitated, the whole network shakes. Likewise, people 
emphasize that their actions trigger consequences for others that reverberate across networks of 
social relations like a tug of the bird-scaring rope. From this perspective, the defining feature of 
interdependent self-construal is not greater value of relationship, but instead an experience—
again, for better or worse—of embeddedness in community. 
With respect to perception and cognition, research has linked interdependent 
constructions of self with holistic tendencies to focus attention on contextual forces or 
relationships as the primary unit of reality (Nisbett et al., 2001). The experience of self as a 
relational node embedded in context reflects and promotes “field-dependent” perceptual 
tendencies to focus on relations among objects in their surrounding context, to make sense of 
situations by considering relationships among objects or events, and to make situational 
attributions when understanding the sources of action (Masuda & Nisbett, 2001; Nisbett et al., 
2001). Similarly, the holistic focus on relationships between objects and attention to background 
context reflects and promotes tendencies to categorize objects according to functional 
relationship rather than defining attributes, dialectic reasoning styles, and tolerance for logical 
contradiction (Nisbett et al., 2001; Peng & Nisbett, 1999). 
With respect to motivation, research has linked interdependent constructions of self with 
prevention-focused tendencies (Higgins, 1996; see also Lee et al., 2000) to meet obligations, live 
up to normative expectations, and attend to domains that require self-improvement (e.g., 
Kitayama et al., 1997). Interdependent constructions of self as a node in a network of 
interpersonal connection are associated with a de-emphasis on expression of personal attributes 
(Savani et al., 2008), motivations to act in ways that fit in with others (Kim & Markus, 1999), 
and an emphasis on adjusting or accommodating oneself to one’s surroundings (Morling et al., 
2002). Likewise, research has associated interdependent constructions of self with motivations to 
maintain relatively unbiased self-views (Heine & Hamamura, 2007) via attention to information 
that indicates shortcomings or failure to meet normative standards and obligations (Kitayama et 
al., 1997). This motivation to prevent shortcomings (rather than promote self-enhancement) is 
especially evident in tendencies to persist at a task longer after failure feedback than success 
feedback (Heine et al., 2001). 
With respect to affect and emotion, research has linked interdependent constructions of 
self to tendencies of experience and expression that emphasize adjustment of self to interpersonal 
context (Kitayama et al., 2010). For example, research has associated interdependent 
constructions of self with emphases on external, “objective,” or consensual meaning of 
emotional experience (Mesquita, 2001; Oishi et al., 2004) and positive evaluation of emotions 
that signal one’s shortcomings (e.g., guilt; see Eid & Diener, 2001). Likewise, research has 
associated interdependent constructions with preference for low-arousal positive affective states 
(e.g., contentment) and deemphasis on expression of elated happiness due to its potentially 
disruptive effects on interpersonal relationships (Tsai, 2007). 
Research has also linked interdependent constructions of self to implications for 
relational and collective belonging. A cultural psychology perspective suggests that the relevant 
feature of interdependent constructions is an experience of relationality as environmentally 
afforded connection. This sense of inherent connection affords a “prevention-focused” 
orientation to relationship that emphasizes painstaking management of obligations for material 
support—what Coe (2011) has referred to as “the materiality of care” (see also Adams & Kurtiş, 
8 
 
2015; Adams & Plaut, 2003; Kim et al., 2008—and an acute awareness of the potential hazards 
of embeddedness in thickly overlapping networks of enduring interpersonal connection (Adams, 
2005). Interdependent constructions resonate strongly with authority ranking models of 
relationality (Fiske, 1991) that promote a sense of vertical positioning characterized by 
reciprocal obligations of deferent obedience and benevolent supervision. They also resonate with 
communal sharing models of relationality (Fiske, 1991) that emphasize fundamental 
connectedness, for better or worse, in prefabricated webs of interpersonal connection. In many 
West African settings, these conceptions find expression in tendencies for people to report a 
relatively small number of friends (Adams & Plaut, 2003), to be vigilant for attacks from envious 
personal enemies (including family and other intimate spaces; Adams, 2005; Geschiere, 1997), 
and to emphasize silence and concealment rather than self-disclosure and revelation (e.g., Ferme, 
2001; Kurtiş & Adams, 2015a; Shaw, 2000). Rather than valorize “manufactured” romantic or 
mating relationships, interdependent constructions resonate with an experience of kinship as the 
prototype of human relationality (Salter & Adams, 2012). 
Similarly, interdependent constructions of self afford a relationally embedded experience 
of collective belonging associated with a “common-bond” experience of group membership as a 
network of actual connections (Prentice et al., 1994; Yuki, 2003). Although this relationally 
embedded notion of collective belonging may provide a strong sense of tangible bonds, it also 
places constraints on the number of bonds that people can claim (in part because of the 
corresponding experience of substantial obligation; see Triandis et al., 1988). In contrast to 
assumptions that “group-oriented” collectivists will show stronger patterns of group-relevant 
phenomena, Yuki (2003) proposes that the more relational experience of collective belonging 
associated with interdependent constructions will promote relatively weak patterns of the 
phenomena detailed by the social identity tradition. This includes ingroup favoritism, (Karp, Jin, 
Yamagishi, & Shinotsuka, 1993; Yamagishi, Jin, & Kiyonari, 1999), especially in the case of 
minimal groups or other artificially imposed categories.  
 Resonating with Yuki’s (2003) account, researchers propose that people in many 
societies have experienced collective belonging not in terms of imagined community in an 
abstract category, but rather as deeply embedded connection in locally rooted networks 
characterized by a long history of tangible interactions (see Hawkins, 2002; and Lentz, 2006, for 
examples from what is now Northern Ghana). One implication of this perspective is that the 
“standard” patterns of belonging meticulously documented in such mainstream traditions as 
social identity theory and self-categorization theory are partly the product of human invention—
that is, cultural innovations for imagination of community—rather than a natural law of human 
psychology (for discussions of cultural affordances that scaffold imagination of national 
community, see Anderson, 1983; Reicher & Hopkins, 2001; Winachakul, 1994). 
Beyond Self-Construal: Cultural-Ecological Scaffolding of Self 
Especially as appropriated in mainstream social-personality psychology, the notions of 
independent and interdependent self-construal are somewhat limiting to the extent that they 
entail problematic reifications of both culture and self (Adams & Markus, 2004; Kurtiş & 
Adams, 2013; Lewis & Wigen, 1997; Okazaki, David, & Abelmann, 2007; Said, 1978). A 
formulation that resonates more clearly with a cultural psychology analysis is one that Markus 
and Kitayama (along with Patricia Mullally) later referred to as selfways: scaffolding or 
affordances for psychological functioning embedded in the structure of everyday cultural 
ecologies (Markus, Mullally, & Kitayama, 1997). The notion of selfways makes explicit the idea 
that the influence of culture on self is not a matter of reified cultural traditions shaping, once-
9 
 
and-for-all, an essentially independent or interdependent self. Instead, the notion of selfways 
affords more fluid understandings of culture and self. With respect to culture, the notion of 
selfways suggests fluid forms of cultural influence infused in diffuse institutions, practices, and 
artifacts rather than calcified traditions associated with rigidly bounded groups (Adams & 
Markus, 2004). This more fluid notion of cultural influence focuses on the ecological scaffolding 
that promotes psychological tendencies rather than labeling tendencies as the product of some 
reified cultural tradition. With respect to self, the notion of selfways makes explicit that the 
foundations of psychological experience are not limited to internal architecture, but also reside in 
the structure of everyday cultural worlds. Rather than trait-like construals that solidify during 
early childhood and persist via inertia throughout the life course, the notion of selfways treats the 
cultural construction of self as the repeated reconstitution of relatively fluid, habitual tendencies 
that are the product of ongoing engagement with ecologically inscribed, psychological resources. 
Independent Selfways 
Theory and research have associated independent selfways with a variety of ecological 
realities. With respect to distal ecological forces, independent selfways often feature a high 
degree of market integration and organizational scale that allow for depersonalized economic 
transactions between anonymous strangers (Henrich et al., 2005). Independent selfways often 
feature voluntary settlement patterns (Kitayama, Ishii, Imada, Takemura, & Ramaswamy, 2006) 
and relatively high levels of spatial and social mobility (Oishi & Kisling, 2009) that both reflect 
and promote a sense of independence from any particular social or geographical context 
(Giddens, 1991). Similarly, independent selfways often include collective realities of relative 
affluence (amid pockets of individual scarcity) that afford high degrees of mobility (e.g., via 
roads, mass transit, and other transportation infrastructure), convenient access to resources (e.g., 
fuel, electricity, and water), and a sense of financial independence: the ability to enact one’s 
preferences and pursue life projects with relative freedom from material constraint (Markus, 
Ryff, Curhan, & Palmersheim, 2004). In turn, high levels of mobility and affluence are 
associated with “neolocal” residence (i.e., the practice of leaving a parental home to occupy a 
separate residence upon reaching adulthood), self-contained housing (i.e., with its own kitchen, 
bath, and toilet rather than communal or public amenities), and a small ratio of persons to 
rooms—all of which afford an experience of privacy and interpersonal insulation. 
With respect to proximal forces, independent selfways often involve sociocultural 
organization of bodily functions in ways that reflect and afford a sense of privacy and 
interpersonal separation. These include bedtime rituals of parent-child separation to foster an 
experience of independent subjectivity (e.g., Shweder, Jensen, & Goldstein, 1995). These also 
include food rituals—such as individual place settings, individually wrapped meals from drive-
through windows of fast food restaurants, “modern” conveniences that allow one to prepare and 
consume food quickly with a minimum of labor, and a high frequency of eating alone—that 
reflect and afford a socially disembedded experience of the biological activity of eating (see e.g., 
Rozin, 2007). Other proximal realities of independent selfways include low-context 
communication practices that assume relatively little common ground between speakers and rely 
on direct or explicit reference (Hall, 1976), linguistic features (e.g., pronoun use; Kashima & 
Kashima, 1998) that reflect and promote a sense of bounded actors abstracted from relational or 
physical context, and a host of “promotion-focused” childcare practices (Higgins, 1996)—
including visually and verbally oriented interaction with infants as more or less equal partners 
(Keller, Schölmerich, & Eibl-Eibesfeldt, 1988; LeVine et al., 1994; see Greenfield, Keller, 
Fuligni, & Maynard, 2003)—that emphasize exploration (Rothbaum, Weisz, Pott, Miyake, & 
10 
 
Morelli, 2000), bolstering (Higgins, 1996); nurturance (Higgins, 1997); and the emotional value 
of children (Kağıtçıbaşı & Ataca, 2005). 
A relatively recent focus of cultural psychological research has been the inscription of 
different selfways in material artifacts (see Morling & Lamoreaux, 2008). To cite only a few 
examples, researchers have associated independent selfways with magazine advertisements that 
emphasize originality, freedom, and rejection of traditional roles (Kim & Markus, 1999); media 
interviews with Olympic athletes and other forms of reportage that locate the source of 
performance in individual ability or effort (Markus, Uchida, Omoregie, Townsend, & Kitayama, 
2006); popular music that valorizes self-expression and independence (Snibbe & Markus, 2005); 
and pictures in children’s books that valorize excitedly happy affective states (Tsai, Louie, Chen, 
& Uchida, 2007). In summary, people in worlds informed by independent selfways inhabit 
objective realities that—regardless of personal endorsement—reflect and promote intersubjective 
understandings of individuality and self-expression as normal and normative ways of being 
(Chiu, Gelfand, Yamagishi, Shteynberg, & Wan, 2010). 
Interdependent Selfways 
The preceding section describes a set of realities that hegemonic psychology tends to 
portray as “just natural” (and then bases a science of human experience on interactions with this 
“natural” environment).3 Accordingly, it is useful to recall the extent to which these realities are 
highly unusual in the context of human history (Arnett, 2008; Henrich, Heine, & Norenzayan, 
2010). To get some sense for alternative models of person and context, consider ecological 
realities associated with the relatively interdependent selfways common across a variety of West 
African worlds. These realities include such distal ecological forces as limited spatial and social 
mobility (e.g., due to difficulty of transportation) that both reflect and promote a sense of 
rootedness in community and place; Giddens, 1991; Tengan, 1991). These realities often (but not 
always) involve labor-intensive, subsistence activities; difficult access to basic amenities (e.g., 
fuel, electricity, and water); and a collective reality of scarcity (with nearly half of the population 
living on less than $1.25 per day; United Nations Development Program, 2010) that demand 
extensive coordination within and between domestic units and reciprocal obligations of support 
to ensure viable existence. Similarly, these realities often include residence in communal or 
compound houses with multiple generations of relatives who are typically linked by patrilineal 
descent (occasionally by matrilineal descent; Oppong, 1974) and often include relationships 
(e.g., cowife and siblings of the same father by different mothers) that arise from the widespread 
practice of polygynous marriage (up to 25% of all conjugal unions; see Dodoo, 1998). These 
residential realities require people to share space and amenities (e.g., bedrooms, kitchen, bath, 
and toilet) in ways that—regardless of personal endorsement—constitute an experience of 
embedded interdependence. 
With respect to proximal forces, the interdependent selfways common in many West 
African settings include sociocultural organization of bodily functions—for example, eating 
from a common bowl, drinking from a common cup, and sleeping together in a common bed 
(Morelli, Rogoff, Oppenheim, & Goldsmith, 1992; Keller, 2003)—in ways that afford an 
experience of embeddedness in community (see Fiske, 1991). They include “prevention-
focused” childcare practices (Higgins, 1996)—including bodily contact, parental control, and 
familial obligation (LeVine et al., 1994; Keller, 2003)—that emphasize prudence (cf. Higgins, 
1996), security, and contribution of children to the family’s economic survival (LeVine et al., 
1994; Kağıtçıbaşı, 1996; Keller, 2003). They include practices of ritualized avoidance and 
deferential respect that constitute the experience of authority-ranked relationality (Radcliffe-
11 
 
Brown, 1940; see Fiske, 1991), rituals of memory (e.g., libation and offerings; Cole, 2001; Fiske, 
1991) that promote a sense of ongoing relationship with departed ancestors, and socially 
distributed forms of childcare (e.g., fosterage; Bledsoe, 1990; Goody, 1982) that promote 
experience of broad connection rather than intense dyadic attachment (Weisner, 2005). Together 
with an abundance of material artifacts—including lorry slogans (van der Geest, 2009), calendars 
(Adams & Dzokoto, 2003), and movies (Meyer, 1998), to name only a few—these everyday 
realities reflect and promote intersubjective understandings of embedded relationality as normal 
and normative ways of being.  
History and Materiality of Self(ways)  
From this cultural psychology perspective, contextual variation in self and experience is 
less the product of conscious indoctrination into different value systems than it is something that 
arises in bottom-up fashion as people repeatedly engage everyday realities that elicit or shape 
psychological habits. A useful concept in this regard is habitus (see Bourdieu, 1977), which 
refers to direct inscription of ecological affordances on a person’s habitual modes of affect, 
cognition, motivation, and being in the world. This notion provides a useful alternative to 
prevailing understandings of sociocultural influences on self. Perhaps reflecting their origins in 
the discipline of psychology, typical formulations have tended to locate sociocultural influence 
in individual endorsement of cultural values (see Oyserman, Coon, & Kemmelmeier, 2002) or 
individual construal of self as independent or interdependent (Matsumoto, 1999). More recently, 
theorists and researchers have proposed a conceptual move away from individual endorsement 
toward intersubjective knowledge of modal community tendencies as carriers of sociocultural 
influence (Chiu et al., 2010). The notion of habitus extends this conceptual move beyond 
relatively conscious, intersubjective knowledge to emphasize relatively nonconscious processes 
of environmental regulation via implicit ecological blueprints embedded in the structure of 
everyday cultural worlds. From this perspective, tendencies that psychologists have associated 
with different varieties of self-construal are not essential features of an independent or 
interdependent self, but instead constitute a form of “history in person” (Holland & Lave, 2001): 
embodied traces from a history of engagement with material realities that continually reconstitute 
those tendencies. In this way, the notion of habitus adds considerations of history and materiality 
to counteract essentialist notions of independent or interdependent self.  
A similar form of reification is evident in discussion of selfways. Hegemonic psychology 
tends to consider realities associated with independent selfways as “just natural” and tends to 
portray prevailing patterns in an essentialist manner as a manifestation of timeless traditions or 
reified cultural entities (see Gjerde, 2004; Hermans & Kempen, 1998; Okazaki et al., 2007). In 
contrast, recent work in cultural psychology has illuminated cultural-ecological forces that 
underlie observed patterns. For example, scholars have noted how the experience of mobility 
(Oishi & Kisling, 2009; Oishi, Schug, Yuki & Axt, 2015; Yuki & Schug, 2012), frontier ecology 
(Kitayama, Ishii, Imada, Takemura, & Ramaswamy, 2006), particular forms of livelihood (e.g., 
fishing versus farming; Uskul, Nisbett, & Kitayama, 2008; wheat versus rice agriculture; 
Talhelm et al., 2014), and ecologies of affluence (Adams, Bruckmüller, & Decker, 2012; Kraus 
et al, 2012) afford the habits of mind associated with independent selfways.  
While these accounts provide important contributions to non-essentialist understandings 
of culture and self, they tend to portray independent selfways as the product of cultural 
innovation and intellectual progress. In contrast, decolonial theorists working from epistemic 
perspectives of the Global South (e.g., Comaroff & Comaroff, 2012; de Souza Santos, 2014) link 
independent selfways and associated forms of neoliberal individualism to the coloniality of 
12 
 
everyday life in the modern global order (Grosfoguel, 2002; Mignolo, 2009; Quijano, 2000). 
Rather than the leading edge of human progress, decolonial perspectives emphasize that the 
modern global order is a product of colonial and racial violence.  
This recognition of coloniality as the “dark side of modernity” (Mignolo, 2009) affords 
similar recognition of the coloniality of being (Maldonado-Torres, 2007) as the dark side of 
psychological modernity (e.g., Inkeles, 1969; Inkeles & Smith, 1974). From this perspective, the 
sense of freedom from constraint and abstraction from context associated with independent 
selfways is not a politically innocent development. Instead, independent selfways have their 
foundations in colonial and interpersonal domination (e.g. Shaw, 2000). The modern subject 
position arose and became typical for a privileged few through the appropriation of others’ 
productivity (e.g. in the gendered domestic household, the racialized violence of slavery, or in 
exploitative economic arrangements) which provided them with resources of time, energy, and 
material security to explore personal desires, follow their heart, and pursue their dreams 
(Coltrane, 2000). In this way, a decolonial vision of cultural psychology links the independent 
selfways valorized by hegemonic accounts of psychological science to histories of violent 
appropriation and material oppression.  
Beyond Cultural Variation: Sociocultural Bases of Psychological Experience 
Most people understand a cultural psychology approach as a means for investigating 
diversity in psychological functioning along “cultural-group” dimensions. However, a cultural 
psychology approach is a broader attempt to examine the foundation for psychological 
experience in the structures of everyday cultural worlds. This approach applies beyond questions 
of cultural diversity to topics across the spectrum of psychological science (see Cole, 1996). 
Sociocultural Bases of Species-Typical Tendencies 
With respect to general tendencies, a cultural psychology analysis considers the extent to 
which apparently natural psychological capacities are particular technologies of mind made 
possible by common cultural ecologies. From this perspective, human beings share a set of 
species-typical tendencies that are the product of near-universal engagement with widely 
distributed cultural tools. For example, researchers have noted how apparently “natural” 
cognitive or perceptual abilities are associated with cultural ecologies in which language and 
literacy practices are standard features. Tomasello (1999) argued that many forms of higher 
cognition characteristic of species-typical humans are not themselves innate, but instead depend 
on cultural tools that have developed via processes of cumulative cultural evolution. Similarly, 
many near-universal and species-typical cognitive and perceptual abilities—including the use of 
graphic conventions to represent and perceive depth in two-dimensional drawings, memory for 
disconnected lists of information, spontaneous strategies for organizing memory, taxonomic 
versus functional categories to organize test objects, and willingness to go beyond personal 
experience in answering logical problems—are not innate properties of the human organism, but 
instead reflect near-universal engagement with widespread institutions of literacy and formal, 
school-based education (Rogoff, 1990; see also Scribner & Cole, 1981). 
Likewise, the near-universal influence and expansion of market economic activity to a 
variety of “traditional” settings carries with it cultural affordances that systematically evoke 
certain forms of experience (Greenfield, Maynard, & Marti, 2009). For example, researchers 
noted that apparently “standard” tendencies to diverge from unrestrained self-interest and make 
relatively egalitarian offers in one-shot economic games are not “just natural” features of genetic 
inheritance, but instead are associated with integration into market economies that require 
abstract forms of impersonal cooperation (Henrich et al., 2005). Similarly, researchers who 
13 
 
observed a Zinacanatec Mayan setting over time documented increasing integration into market 
economic activity that was, in turn, associated with increased reliance on technology, 
individuation and opportunities for expression of individual choice, and specialization for 
economic tasks (Greenfield et al., 2009). The researchers also noted associated changes due to 
increased urban residence, including increased contact with strangers, contact with people of 
different ethnicities, and increases in the range of economic and social possibilities for women. 
Finally, technological advances have contributed to a global cultural space that has a 
similar impact on identity-development processes of youth from a variety of national settings, 
despite differences in local traditions of identity construction. Youth around the world encounter 
manifestations of global popular culture that include film, music, and fashion distributed via such 
widely (although unevenly; see Ferguson, 2006) available mechanisms as satellite television, cell 
phones, and Internet cafes. As a result, they often develop a form of bicultural identity reflecting 
the influence of engagement with local communities of origin and an “imagined” global 
community (Arnett, 2002). This bicultural identity increases the range of options for construction 
of personal identity and therefore grants some measure of increased authorship over one’s life 
story. However, this bicultural identity also creates challenges for identity integration and 
increases potential for intergenerational conflict (Arnett, 2002). 
In all of these cases, the emphasis of a cultural psychology analysis is not cultural 
diversity, but rather cultural-ecological structures—whether unique to a particular community or 
shared across human societies—that continually reconstitute apparently “natural” features of 
human psychological functioning. One noteworthy implication of these ideas is that failure to 
observe a difference in comparisons of samples from two communities does not mean lack of a 
cultural difference. Rather than “natural” features of the human organism, the observed similarity 
can be the product of universal engagement with the same cultural-ecological affordances. 
Likewise, a study with university students from different national settings does not necessarily 
constitute a cross-cultural comparison. Although the students may differ in national cultures, 
they share engagement with ecological affordances associated with university cultural spaces. 
Sociocultural Bases of Personal Experience 
With respect to personal dispositions, one application of a cultural psychology analysis 
might be to investigate variation in personality across “cultural” settings (see McCrae & Allik, 
2002). Instead, we consider a more general issue: the extent to which personal dispositions 
reflect the particular sociocultural ecologies that a person inhabits. Just as a cultural psychology 
perspective does not deny the existence of genetically inherited, species-typical capacities, it 
likewise does not deny the existence of genetically inherited temperaments or predispositions—
what one might refer to as “traits”—that vary across individuals. However, just as genetically 
inherited capacities require complementary input from cultural-ecological affordances to produce 
species-typical skills of recognizable human beings, so too do genetically linked predispositions 
require complementary input from cultural-ecological affordances to produce normally 
functioning, recognizably human persons. 
Personal identity. Among the most important ecological affordances in this regard are 
resources for the life stories that constitute personal identity (McAdams, 2001). One contribution 
of cultural ecologies to the construction of personal identity concerns content. What matters for 
inclusion in one’s identity story—category identities such as gender, nationality, ethnicity, 
lineage, class, and age set; or role identities such as sibling, parent, child, patron, client, and 
foster parent—depends on the cultural world that one inhabits. For example, the influence of 
gender on experience of personal identity varies greatly across settings, determining many 
14 
 
aspects of a person’s life story (e.g., occupation) in some worlds, but exerting more limited 
influence in others. Likewise, the influence of different roles varies across settings. In many 
Majority-World spaces, the roles of sibling or parent exert strong influence on one’s evolving 
life story and matter more than the “manufactured” role of spouse. In other worlds informed by 
the notion of a “sacred couple” (Shweder et al., 1995), the role of spouse looms large in one’s 
life story, and the search for a (soul)mate is one of the defining themes of a person’s life. 
Cultural ecologies vary in conceptions of the life course in ways that impact personal 
identity stories. Some cultural ecologies emphasize initiation ceremonies, parenthood, and 
“becoming an ancestor” upon one’s death as defining scenes in life stories (e.g., Cole, 2001; 
Oppong, 1973). Other cultural ecologies emphasize school graduations, marriage, professional 
employment, home ownership, retirement, and “going to heaven” as defining scenes. One of the 
most important variations in life course imagination concerns “leaving home.” In many cultural 
ecologies that inform hegemonic psychology, the expectation is that a person will leave the 
family home to start an independent life in a new location soon after reaching adulthood. Many 
identity tasks that hegemonic psychology portrays as “just natural” features of a healthy life 
course—establishing a “secure” attachment bond between parents and children or resolving 
Eriksonian identity crises (1968)—may reflect adjustment to this culturally variable, life-course 
mandate of separation (Bellah, Madsen, Sullivan, Swindler, & Tipton, 1985). This contrasts with 
many West African communities, in which the expectation is enduring connection—often a 
lifetime spent in or near the same residence—that persists even after death through practices such 
as libation, offerings of food, and divination (e.g., Fiske, 1991, pp. 281–283). In these worlds, 
problems of adjustment concern embeddedness as an ecological fact of life and successful 
management of developmental tasks associated with “being a relative” (Reisman, 1992). 
Beyond content, different cultural ecologies also impact the process and organization of 
identity stories. One of the most important functions of identity stories is to integrate or abstract 
an experience of sameness or unity from an individual’s different performances or presentations 
of self across time and audiences (Goffman, 1959; McAdams, 2001). Cultural ecologies differ in 
the degree to which they afford or promote such integration and abstraction. A typical pattern 
across human history has been one in which everyday realities afford an experience of identity 
tied to situated performances (e.g., occupational role, family position). In contrast, a history of 
engagement with “modern” spaces promotes a relatively integrated experience of being as a 
bundle of essential features, abstracted from situated performances, that define a person’s 
authentic self-identity (Baumeister, 1987; Giddens, 1991). 
From this perspective, the experience of personal identity is not the unfolding and 
expression of some core, authentic essence; instead, it is a sociocultural construction: the product 
of affordances that permit abstraction and integration of identity across situations. Indeed, 
research suggests that cultural ecologies vary in the extent to which they both afford such 
abstraction and require it for social approval and well-being (Suh, 2002). In summary, a cultural 
psychology analysis emphasizes the extent to which identity stories reflect not only the collective 
identities, role identities, and conceptions of life course that are prominent in different cultural 
ecologies (Erikson, 1968; Reisman, 1992), but also affordances for abstraction or embeddedness 
of identity associated with different selfways (Suh, 2002). 
Attitudes and dispositions. Although few psychologists would deny that the 
construction and experience of personal identity reflects considerable sociocultural influence, 
prevailing approaches in hegemonic psychology regard other person factors—for example, 
attitudes, preferences, traits, and habitual self-construals—as deeply embodied, essential features 
15 
 
of individual organisms. Perhaps reflecting the tendency to see context-abstracted persons as the 
source of agency and experience, prevailing understandings hold that, whether conceived as 
genetically inherited traits or habitual dispositions acquired during early socialization, it is these 
internal structures that guide behavior and experience. From this hegemonic perspective, the 
primary task of an integrated social-personality psychology is to determine the properties of 
situations that moderate the operation of these guiding dispositions. This prevailing model does 
not necessarily deny the possibility of change in guiding dispositions (as the enormous body of 
research on such topics as attitude change suggests). However, the implicit conceptions at work 
in this model portray such change as a case of rewriting a person’s operating code with a new set 
of internal guides to replace earlier ones. As a productive contrast to this prevailing view of 
personal dispositions, a cultural psychology analysis emphasizes two points.  
Cultural-ecological variation. The first point concerns cultural-ecological variation in the 
extent to which local realities permit (or require) individual exercise of personal dispositions. 
Cultural ecologies associated with independent selfways typically promote disjoint constructions 
of action as the self-directed product of internal dispositions, and these ecologies afford the 
opportunity to exercise these personal dispositions. In contrast, cultural ecologies associated with 
interdependent selfways typically promote conjoint constructions of action as a collaborative 
production of personal dispositions in concert with environmental affordances (e.g., Markus & 
Kitayama, 2004). Accordingly, even when people across settings are similarly shaped to have 
dispositional stances, these dispositional stances typically have a greater impact on action and 
experience in worlds informed by independent selfways than worlds informed by interdependent 
selfways. For example, research suggests that subjective emotional experience informs life 
satisfaction judgments to a greater extent in “individualist” settings than “collectivist” settings 
(where normative standards are equally strong predictors of life satisfaction judgments; Suh, 
Diener, Oishi, & Triandis, 1998). Similarly, research suggests that personal preferences serve as 
a guide for product choice to a greater extent in middle-class American settings than similarly 
situated, middle-class Indian settings, for whom product choices also reference preferences of 
important relatives (Savani et al., 2008). Finally, research suggests that preferences for 
attractiveness have a greater impact on interpersonal outcomes in cultural ecologies associated 
with independent selfways (North American or urban settings) than in cultural ecologies 
associated with interdependent selfways (e.g., West African or rural settings; Anderson, Adams, 
& Plaut, 2008; Plaut, Adams, & Anderson, 2009). 
In short, worlds informed by independent selfways both afford and require recruitment 
and enactment of personal dispositions—whether attitudes (Ybarra & Trafimow, 1998), 
assessments of individual happiness (Suh et al., 1998), product preferences (Savani et al., 2008), 
or interpersonal attractions (Anderson et al., 2008)—to an extent that worlds informed by 
interdependent selfways do not. Indeed, the association of independent selfways with the 
“fundamental attribution error” (Ross, 1977)—the tendency to overweight personal dispositions 
and underweight ecological affordances as causes of behavior—may be a reflection of this 
variability in affordances for exercise of personal dispositions. That is, dispositional attributions 
may be less “erroneous” in settings informed by disjoint rather than conjoint models of agency. 
Sociocultural sources. Beyond the issue of cultural variation, the defining feature of a 
cultural psychology analysis is to bridge the conceptual divide between embodied personal 
dispositions and the cultural-ecological structures that continually tune those dispositions. From 
this perspective, ecological structures do not merely moderate the direction of preexisting 
dispositions; instead, a history of engagement with particular ecological structures continually 
16 
 
reconstitutes configurations of affect, motivation, and cognition. Rather than essential 
characteristics, a cultural psychology perspective highlights the extent to which personal 
dispositions are embodied traces of context in person: an acquired environmental charge 
resulting from a history of engagement with ecological affordances for psychological experience 
embedded in the structure of local worlds (Mischel, 1968). 
There are a number of noteworthy resonances between this notion of context in person 
and other theoretical perspectives. One is the “environmental associations” interpretation of 
implicit attitudes, which highlights the extent to which a person’s “automatic” affective stances 
toward objects reflect histories of engagement with ecological representations that portray the 
object with positive or negative connotations (e.g., Karpinski & Hilton, 2001). Related to this is 
recent work on the “social tuning” of attitudes (and the perspective of shared reality theory more 
generally; see Sinclair, Lowery, Hardin, & Colangelo, 2005; Hardin & Higgins, 1996), which 
emphasizes the extent to which people collaboratively construct situated attitudes and other 
personal stances in the course of creating common ground with particular audiences. Another 
point of resonance is with discourse analytic perspectives, which emphasize how people’s 
reports of attitudes and other personal stances are not the expression of some essential internal 
attribute, but instead reflect embodied representation of culturally inscribed rituals and discursive 
repertories that people reproduce in situated performances of persuasion and justification 
(Durrheim & Dixon, 2004).  
Another expression of the idea of “context in person” is a cultural psychology account of 
an enduring topic of research on personal dispositions in social-personality psychology: 
dispositions of racist bias (Adams, Biernat, Branscombe, Crandall, & Wrightsman, 2008).4 
Accounts of racism in hegemonic psychological science have focused almost exclusively on 
personal dispositions of stereotyping and prejudice. Critics have noted how this understanding of 
racism in terms of individual bias directs interventions toward the task of changing hearts and 
minds while neglecting the cultural-ecological structures that afford racist subjectivity and 
reproduce racist inequality (see Wright & Lubensky, 2008). In contrast, the defining feature of a 
cultural psychology analysis is to bridge the conceptual divide between embodied personal 
dispositions and the cultural-ecological structures that continually tune those dispositions. This 
perspective conceives of prejudice, stereotypes, and other tendencies of racist bias as the product 
of engagement with racist ecologies. In turn, recognition of the cultural psychological 
foundations of personal bias suggests a shift in emphasis of intervention efforts from changing 
personal dispositions to transforming the ecologically embedded structures that continually 
reconstitute those dispositions.   
Summary 
A cultural psychology perspective emphasizes the extent to which much of psychological 
experience—not only the psychological correlates of independent and interdependent selfways 
that have been the focus of most work in cultural psychology, but also habits and dispositions 
that are the topic of hegemonic psychology more generally—is not the “just natural” expression 
of internal essence. Instead, it reflects the sociocultural constitution of the person: the continual 
tuning of subjectivity to historically evolved structures for mind embedded in the stuff of 
everyday worlds. This idea has been an enduring theme in the interdisciplinary exercise of social 
psychology (e.g., Mead, 1934). A cultural psychology perspective is one of several theoretical 
bases from which to recapture this theme. 
17 
 
PERSON IN CONTEXT: 
PSYCHOLOGICAL CONSTITUTION OF CULTURAL WORLDS 
The preceding focus on the cultural constitution of psychological experience resonates 
with the objectivism and environmentalist roots of social psychology evident in discussions of 
automaticity (Bargh & Chartrand, 1999; Devine, 1989) and ecological affordances (Gibson, 
1977; McArthur & Baron, 1983). However, an exclusive emphasis on contextual determinants 
neglects what may be the defining element of psychological science (as opposed to behavioral 
science or neuroscience): namely, a subjectivist appreciation for the role of dynamic construction 
processes—and related concepts of activity (versus behavior; Bruner, 1990), agency, meaning, 
construal, and imagination—in the perception, interpretation, and (re-)production of everyday 
reality (Griffin & Ross, 1991).  
Upstream Impacts on Action 
The typical way in which psychologists have considered dynamic construction processes 
is with respect to the upstream side of action. For example, psychologists have considered the 
necessarily “subjective” perception of “objective” physical stimuli. Whether the topic is visual 
perception (e.g., Segall, Campbell, & Herskovitz, 1963), auditory perception (Bregman, 1990), 
memory (Bartlett, 1932), or identity (Mead, 1934), people do not have direct access to objective 
reality; instead, they build (i.e., construct) an emergent experience of reality from underspecified 
inputs. Likewise, social psychologists have emphasized the phenomenon of subjective construal, 
whereby people actively interpret situations that are inherently ambiguous (e.g., whether a 
remark about a person’s appearance is a put-down, come-on, ingratiation, or relatively innocent 
compliment; Ross & Nisbett, 1991; Griffin & Ross, 1991). 
In similar fashion, cultural psychologists emphasize that the intersection of cultural-
ecological niches does not wholly determine a person’s experience; instead, people exercise 
some direction over selection and meaning of cultural resources that they appropriate. An 
important implication for a cultural psychology analysis is that each act of appropriation or 
interpretation constitutes a form of selection pressure on the evolution of cultural realities 
(Heath, Bell, & Sternberg, 2001; Lau, Chiu, & Lee, 2001; McIntyre, Lyons, Clark, & Kashima, 
2004; Norenzayan & Atran, 2004; Schaller, Conway, & Tanchuk, 2002). As people 
preferentially attend to and act on interpretations of some features of a situation, they not only 
ensure the continued relevance or reproduction of those features (in slightly altered form), but 
also produce continued irrelevance of or silence about other possible features (Trouillot, 1995). 
As an illustration, consider a classic study of sleeping arrangements among people in 
Chicago, Illinois, United States, and Bhubaneswar, Orissa, India (Shweder et al., 1995). Noting 
that people in the former city tend to sleep with fewer people to a space than do people in the 
latter city, researchers considered whether this pattern reflected differences in desired ways of 
being or was merely a function of material resources impinging on a universal desire for privacy. 
When the researchers asked participants to allocate sleeping space to a 7-member family under 
different conditions of resource availability, participants tended to reproduce locally typical 
sleeping patterns regardless of material affordances. That is, participants in Chicago tended to 
preserve the privacy of the “sacred” conjugal couple even in conditions of resource scarcity, and 
participants from Bhubaneswar tended to preserve the local patterns of cosleeping (e.g., to 
protect vulnerable members and guarantee female chastity) under conditions of resource 
abundance. This study suggests that, even when cultural ecologies appear to be static and 
unchanging across generations, this appearance of inertia often reflects the dynamic exercise of 
18 
 
human intentionality and preferential selection to maintain desired cultural ecologies in the face 
of structural forces (e.g., acquisition of resources) that might enable other ways of being. 
Downstream Consequences of Action 
A second way in which one can theorize dynamic construction processes is with respect 
to the downstream side of action. As people act on their interpretations of events, they inscribe 
observable traces of their subjectivity on intersubjective space and material realities. These 
materialized traces of psychological experience influence the subsequent flow of interpretation 
and activity not only for producers and their immediate interaction partners, but also for present 
and future third-party observers who come in contact with those behavioral products. For 
example, a person who expresses greater or less interest in a phone conversation as a function of 
beliefs about visual attractiveness of the conversation partner elicits verbal responses from the 
partner that subsequent, third-party observers find more or less interesting (Snyder, Tanke, & 
Berschied, 1977). A man who responds with aggression (versus laughter) when another person 
calls him “Asshole!” reconstructs normative understandings of the event as a personal attack or 
insult that demands retaliation (rather than a ridiculous loss of self-control that one should 
ignore), and suggests to observers that any man’s personal honor requires that he do the same 
(Cohen, Nisbett, Bowdle, & Schwarz, 1996; see Vandello & Cohen, 2004). A person who 
responds with liking or approval of someone who maintains high identity consistency across 
diverse situations reproduces normative understandings of this consistency as authenticity 
(versus insensitivity or failure to accommodate self to situations) and increases the likelihood of 
others will strive for such consistency (Suh, 2002). A mother who routinely asks her child about 
subjective emotional experience of daily events (rather than normative understandings of those 
events) directs her child’s emerging autobiography in ways that habitually reference subjective 
emotional experience (versus normative understandings) as a guide to interpretation of events 
(Wang & Brockmeier, 2002). A man who responds to somatic manifestations of anxiety by 
raising the alarm that a passerby has stolen his penis not only produces a construction of that 
interaction as an incident of magical theft, but also reproduces the associated realities (e.g., 
charged atmosphere of anxiety or the belief in a world populated by magical penis thieves) that 
reconstitute fertile ground for others to report a similar experience (Adams & Dzokoto, 2007). 
By drawing attention to such downstream consequences of action, a cultural psychology 
perspective extends the idea of subjective construal in historical and material directions. When 
people act on subjective construals they produce material realities that bear the traces of their 
subjectivity and thereby inscribe personal psychology into ecological context. 
To illustrate this idea of “person in context,” consider a classic study among students at 
Kyoto University (Japan) and the University of Oregon (United States; Kitayama et al., 1997). 
Researchers asked students in these universities to provide situations from their own lives in 
which they experienced success and failure. The researchers then exposed different samples of 
students from these universities to a random sample of 100 success situations and 100 failure 
situations from each university, and they asked them to consider whether (and how much) their 
self-esteem would rise or fall if they experienced those situations. Besides an effect of participant 
background, such that European American students at Oregon (who reported net self-esteem 
gain) tended to report higher self-esteem in response to situations than did Japanese students at 
Kyoto (who reported net self-esteem loss), results also revealed an effect of situation source. 
Regardless of participant background, Oregon-produced situations tended to elicit more self-
enhancing (or less self-critical) responses and Kyoto-produced settings tended to elicit more self-
critical (or less self-enhancing) responses. This study suggests that the patterns of promotion-
19 
 
focused self-enhancement and prevention-focused self-criticism observed in American and 
Japanese settings (e.g., Heine et al., 1999) reside not only in the psychological habits of persons, 
but also in the enhancement-affording or criticism-affording situations that people in these 
settings create. These situations bear the self-evaluation tendencies of their producers, and exert 
influence on the self-evaluation of subsequent actors who encounter them. 
Dynamic Construction of Personal Identity 
To further illustrate dynamic construction processes, consider again the phenomenon of 
identity. Integration and stability in personal identity are not merely the reflection of some 
authentic, internal core. Instead, the apparent stability of personal identity requires continual acts 
of (re-)creation as a person collaborates with a relatively stable set of audiences (Hammack, 
2008; Pasupathi, 2001) and draws on relatively stable configurations of ecological affordances—
including selfways, subject positions (Hermans, 2001), and collective identity stereotypes—to 
keep the story going (McAdams, 2001). 
In terms of upstream influences, a person can exercise agency and direction over the 
identity process by “selectively appropriating” elements of past autobiography or local 
affordances and “imaginatively construing” them in ways that make sense for the person’s 
particular identity story (McAdams, 2001, p. 101). For example, research suggests that people do 
not recall autobiographical events in neutral or objective fashion, but instead do so in ways that 
serve identity needs of the present (e.g., emphasizing success over failure to preserve a sense of 
moral adequacy, personal efficacy, or self-esteem; Wilson & Ross, 2003). In terms of 
downstream influences, the identity stories that people tell themselves and others have important 
consequences for self-knowledge and motivation (e.g., Pasupathi, 2001; Wilson & Ross, 2003); 
in particular, psychologists have noted the extent to which identity stories provide a person with 
a sense of meaning, direction, and purpose.  
A cultural psychology perspective suggests the extent to which integration and stability in 
identities occur via the psychological constitution of everyday realities that provide the 
ecological foundation for those identities. An interesting program of research in this regard 
concerns the “behavioral residue” of personality: for example, the extent to which the content 
and arrangement of artifacts in a room represent material expressions of personal traits (e.g., 
Gosling, Ko, Mannarelli, & Morris, 2002). Similar work comes from research on place-making: 
the process by which people transform natural space, often through use of tangible objects, by 
individually or jointly infusing it with meaning. For example, people constitute relationships in 
part through the collaborative production of a jointly constructed, material reality; that is, they 
buy jointly owned objects, decorate and furnish homes, create gardens, and otherwise inscribe 
their relationality on the structure of everyday worlds (Lohmann, Arriaga, & Goodfriend, 2003). 
Likewise, research has examined the extent to which people express collective identities by 
displaying national flags (Skitka, 2005), wearing clothing with university symbols, and otherwise 
“basking in reflected glory” (Cialdini et al, 1976). All of these cases illustrate the psychological 
constitution of cultural-ecological realities, by which actors deposit traces of their psychological 
experience in the material stuff of everyday worlds. However, rather than see such behavioral 
residue as the end-product of experience, a cultural psychology analysis emphasizes the extent to 
which the associated artifacts—unmade beds, joint purchases, national flags—provide 
scaffolding that continually reconstitutes the associated personal, relational, and collective 
experience (see Mischel, 1968; Ross & Nisbett, 1991). 
One important implication of this discussion is to propose greater space for the exercise 
of human agency than one might otherwise expect from a perspective that emphasizes ecological 
20 
 
regulation. Researchers who emphasize the “automaticity of everyday life” have provocatively 
asserted that perhaps 95% of psychological experience occurs via environmental regulation of 
habitual responses. This suggests that only 5% of psychological experience is open to self-
reflection or personal control toward meaningful, self-defining pursuits (Bargh, 1997; Bargh & 
Chartrand, 1999). Without necessarily disputing this assessment, a cultural psychology analysis 
proposes the psychological constitution of cultural realities as an additional, typically 
underappreciated process by which people exercise self-direction. People exercise reflection and 
intention not only to direct current activity, but also to construct worlds into which they deposit 
their subjectivity and thereby permit a form of “automatic” intentional influence during future 
moments in other settings when their action and experience are under environmental regulation. 
Accordingly, some discussions of ecological regulation may understate the impact of human 
agency because they fail to appreciate the extent to which the ecology of human experience is 
not a “just natural” environment. Indeed, this failure to appreciate the psychological constitution 
of everyday ecologies affords tendencies to naturalize the status quo and to deny the “possessive 
investment” (Lipsitz, 1998) that people have in world maintenance. In contrast, a cultural 
psychology perspective emphasizes that the ecology of human experience is a cultural product 
that mediates the imagination and motivation of the intentional activity that created it.  
Intentional Worlds 
In addition to his famous definition of cultural psychology as the study of mutual 
constitution, Shweder (1990, p. 3) less famously defined cultural psychology as the study of 
“intentional worlds.” As the social-psychological principle of subjective construal emphasizes, 
reality is typically ambiguous in the sense that any situation is open to multiple understandings.  
When people act on particular understandings of a situation, they invest everyday realities with 
beliefs and desires associated with those understandings. This process results in the 
(re)production of intentional worlds: “already-there” (Shweder, 1990, p. 26) cultural ecologies 
that bear the influence of collective understandings and subsequently direct activity toward 
particular ends.  
Although the idea of mutual constitution has been central to a cultural psychology 
perspective in social-personality psychology (e.g., Fiske, Kitayama, Markus, & Nisbett, 1998; 
Kashima, 2000), psychologists have typically ignored the idea of intentional worlds. In part, this 
neglect likely reflects a disciplinary division of labor in which (even social) psychologists 
typically study person-based manifestations of human experience and leave the study of “the 
world” to other social sciences (for a discussion, see Shweder, et al., 2006). As we emphasize 
throughout this paper, this division of labor ignores the extent to which the world is a 
psychological product that mediates self-direction and social influence. However, this neglect 
also reflects a conception of mind as a brain-limited processing mechanism, independent of 
content and abstracted from context (Shweder, 1990). In contrast, the idea of intentional worlds 
resonates with discussions of extended mind (e.g., Clark & Chalmers, 1998) and an appreciation 
for the extent the extent to which species-typical experience requires engagement with the 
scaffolding provided by ecologically embedded mentalities. 
The “intention” in intentional worlds does not necessarily refer to the mental states of 
people who produce, appropriate, or fall under the influence of these cultural products. People 
may appropriate cultural tools without self-conscious reflection; they may engage them with 
little intention or awareness about their (often “unintended”) consequences; and they may 
reproduce them with little intention or awareness about the extent to which they inscribe their 
own beliefs and desires. Rather, the adjective “intentional” refers to the directive force of cultural 
21 
 
realities. Instead of a (just) natural habitat, species-typical human beings inhabit psychologically 
charged, cultural ecologies that systematically orient action toward particular directions. To 
illustrate this concept, Shweder (1990) proposed an analytic framework for the study of the 
relationship between “reality-constituting psyches (intentional persons) and culturally constituted 
realities (intentional worlds)” (p. 27).   
One can speak of an active relationship between psyche and reality “when the target 
person himself [or herself] creates or selects his [or her] intentional world” (Shweder, 1990; p. 
28). As an example of a negative active relationship—one in which “the intentionality of the 
world diminishes or contravenes the intentionality of the person” (Shweder, 1990, p. 27)—
consider a person who places an activated alarm clock across the room so that they must get out 
of bed (rather than hit snooze button) to deactivate it the next morning (Shweder, 1990; based on 
Schelling, 1984). In this example, a “reality-constituting person” recognizes the limitations of 
self-directive capacity to follow more noble intentions in the moment of temptation and 
“constructs an intentional world using collective resources to contravene his or her own 
anticipated preference to stay in bed and go back to sleep” (Shweder, 1990, p. 28). In this and 
other examples, people exercise a distal or culturally mediated form of self-regulation whereby 
they actively invest their higher purposes in intentional worlds that provide more proximal, 
automatic regulation to contravene their less noble intentions in some future moment.  
As an example of a positive active relationship—one in which a “the intentionality of the 
world amplifies or supports the intentionality of the person” (Shweder, 1990, p. 27)—consider 
intentional worlds of romantic love. People on a date often deploy technologies of romance—
soft candlelight, seductive fragrances, fine chocolates, sultry music, and silky textures (Adams, 
Kurtiș, Salter, & Anderson, 2012)—not only as a means to seduce others, but also to “put 
themselves in the mood” and enable their own self-seduction. In such cases, a reality-constituting 
person (the distracted lover) uses a culturally constituted, intentional world (the romantic dinner) 
to produce an experience that the person desires but cannot simply conjure up in the absence of 
material affordances. This example suggests that romantic love is far from a “just” natural 
experience; instead, romantic passion involves desires that people realize via cultural worlds 
designed to constitute that experience (Holland & Eisenhart, 1990).  
The preceding examples illuminate how intentional persons enhance their capacity for 
self-direction by offloading or outsourcing self-regulation to affordances of intentional worlds. 
This active appropriation of cultural affordances to serve personal projects contrasts with more 
common understandings of cultural influence in which “other persons create or select an 
intentional world for the target person in light of that [target] person’s intentionality” (Shweder, 
1990, p. 27). In some cases, these forms of influence can relatively deliberate, as when people 
knowingly deploy cultural affordances to afford or constrain another person’s actions or 
experience in ways that the person herself or himself would not otherwise do. Shweder (1990, 
pp. 27-28) refers to such cases as a reactive relationship between psyche and reality.  
However, the more typical case is what Shweder (1990, p. 28) refers to as a passive 
relationship between psyche and reality: one in which intentional influence becomes embedded 
in routine practice or habitual ways of being that proceed without the awareness or deliberative 
participation of influencer or influenced. Examples of this type come from work by Alan Fiske 
(1991), who documented four basic relational models: Communal Sharing (CS), Authority 
Ranking, (AR), Equality Matching (EM), and Market Pricing (MP). Fiske emphasizes that these 
models are not simply evolved mechanisms hardwired into brain architecture, but also reside in 
the cultural ecologies that intentional persons design to instantiate the models in locally 
22 
 
appropriate ways (see Fiske & Schubert, 2012). Although evolved predispositions associated 
with the models provide potential for certain kinds of experience, people do not realize these 
predispositions and develop the habits of being associated with these models unless they 
participate in worlds that previous generations have arranged to reflect and impart the models. 
To illustrate, consider practices of parent-child interaction in West African settings where 
the AR model is prominent (Fiske, 1991). How do people come to experience parent-child (or 
junior-senior) interaction in terms of this model versus others? Although elders may attempt to 
explicitly indoctrinate children into value systems and ideologies associated with the AR model, 
the more direct way that people acquire the habitual patterns associated with the model is 
through repeated engagement with practices that reflect and promote the model. Everyday 
practices of greeting, eating, sleeping, and interacting routinely direct people of junior status to 
receive service after others, bend their bodies, subvert their gaze, or make themselves low than 
others in ways that inscribe feelings of awe, respect, deference, and obedience. The same 
practices routinely direct people of senior status to receive service before others, to assume more 
expansive postures, or occupy elevated positions over others in ways that promote feelings of 
power and responsibility for protection of others. It is routine performance of these practices in 
the course of everyday interaction—not explicit indoctrination, ideological persuasion, or the 
natural expression/outgrowth of an inborn model—that continually (re-)constitutes the 
psychological habits associated with the model. It is likely that these practices find their way into 
everyday routines through relatively conscious selection; that is, people originally invented 
customary routines based on these practices because the practices reflect local beliefs about what 
is good or true and afford desired behaviors in attunement with those beliefs. Eventually, routine 
practices acquire an inertia of their own; that is, they continue to regulate everyday experience 
without mindful or deliberate engagement of the actors who perform the routines. 
Compare these practices to parent-child interaction in middle-class North American 
settings where the EM model is prominent (Fiske, 1991). How do people come to experience 
parent-child interaction in terms of this model versus others? Again, rather than explicit 
indoctrination, the more direct way that people acquire associated patterns is through repeated 
engagement with practices—e.g., face-to-face interaction featuring conversational turn-taking 
while demanding eye contact (e.g., Greenfield et al., 2003)—that instantiate and promote an 
experience of separate actors who interact as (potentially) equal partners. It is routine 
engagement with these practices that continually re-constitutes the psychological habits 
associated with the model (e.g., habits of independent self-construal).   
Although the preceding examples consider the intentionality of everyday practices, one 
can also consider intentionality of material artifacts. For example, an analysis of children’s books 
suggested that authors in Taiwanese settings produce characters who model relatively low-
arousal positive affect, but authors in American settings produce characters who model relatively 
high-arousal positive affect (Tsai et al., 2007). Likewise, content analysis of televised interviews 
with Olympic medalists suggests that Japanese interviews featured a balance of positive and 
negative evaluations and emphasized the background or social context of performance, but 
American interviews emphasized positive personal characteristics of the performers (Markus et 
al., 2006). Presumably, the primary motivation of the producers of these artifacts is to tell stories 
that resonate with consumers’ sensibilities and preferences, thereby increasing the demand for 
their product. Even so, regardless of producers’ intentions, their products constitute intentional 
worlds that shape consumers’ subjectivity (see Morling & Lamoreaux, 2008). 
Toward a Cultural Psychology of Power and Domination 
23 
 
The idea of intentional worlds has implications for topics across the spectrum of social-
personality psychology. For example, this notion resonates strongly with Bakhtinian perspectives 
on the dialogical nature of personhood or self (Bakhtin, 1981; Hermans, 2001), which emphasize 
how other people’s beliefs and desires constitute multiple subject positions from which a person 
authors an experience of self-identity. Likewise, this idea resonates strongly with research on 
behavioral confirmation processes, which documents how people deposit their beliefs and 
expectations—regarding classroom performance (Rosenthal & Jacobsen, 1968), attractiveness 
(Snyder et al., 1977), rejection (Downey, Freitas, Michaelis, & Khouri, 1998), hostility (Dodge 
& Crick, 1990), or competition (Kelley & Stahelski, 1970)—into local ecologies via immediacy 
behaviors and other observable manifestations. For example, research suggests that people often 
act on anxious expectations about interracial interaction by increasing interpersonal distance as 
measured by physical arrangement in space (e.g., chair distance; see Goff, Steele, & Davies, 
2008; Word, Zanna, & Cooper, 1973). These inscriptions of person in context bear the social 
influence of their producers and can elicit belief-confirming behavior (e.g., emotional distance or 
racialized affect) from the often unwitting targets of the expectancy.  
A promising way in which the idea of intentional worlds can inform social-personality 
psychology concerns the topic of intergroup power. We briefly discuss two examples. 
Privilege as Outcome Enhancement  
The first example is the topic of stereotype threat. Conventional discussions of this topic 
have emphasized how particular constructions of performance evaluation or testing situations—
specifically, as a diagnostic measure of essential intelligence or intellectual merit (Croizet, 2008; 
Steele, 1997)—cause underperformance among people from negatively stereotyped groups 
relative to their “true” ability in the absence of those harmful constructions. However, an 
exclusive emphasis on the harmful consequences of stereotype threat for people from 
disadvantaged groups obscures a key point about the psychology of oppression. Specifically, the 
same constructions of the test that artificially undermine oppressed group performance via 
stereotype threat also serve to artificially inflate dominant group performance via the 
phenomenon of stereotype lift (Walton & Cohen, 2003; Croizet, 2011).  
This often obscured point has important implications for understandings of performance 
and ability. If hegemonic constructions of the test situation provide a platform that leads people 
from dominant groups to overperform relative to their true ability (such that they score higher 
than they otherwise would in the absence of the performance-enhancing construction of the test), 
then how is one to understand their personal ability? Is it most evident in their inflated 
performance under standard constructions of the test situation or their corrected performance 
under more neutral constructions of the test situation? Without denying the possibility of 
performance-relevant dispositions (whether acquired skills or essential abilities; Dweck, Hong, 
& Chiu, 1993), a cultural psychology analysis of “mind in society” (Vygotsky, 1978) emphasizes 
that any performance is a joint product of such dispositions and the particular, culturally evolved 
technologies present in an activity setting. This casts doubt on the possibility of observing raw 
talent from any particular measure. 
A second implication concerns an understanding of the test gap as the result not only of 
barriers that impede outcomes of people from oppressed groups, but also of affordances that 
enhance outcomes of people from dominant groups. Some readers may find it strange to refer to 
standard constructions of the test situation as oppressive or to propose (as we do in the preceding 
paragraph) that one might replace them with “more neutral” constructions. After all, the 
tendency in hegemonic psychological science is to regard the test situation as a paragon of 
24 
 
neutrality. From a cultural psychology perspective, such beliefs in the neutrality of the test 
situation require forms of “unknowing” (Geissler, 2013) similar to those that Shweder (1990) 
described for the experimental laboratory. Specifically, constructions of standardized tests in 
hegemonic psychological science treat the test situation 
as a privileged space, where, quite fantastically and against much evidence, it is 
conveniently assumed that one can physically enter a transcendental realm where 
the effects of context, content, and meaning can be eliminated, standardized, or 
kept under control, and [ability] observed in the raw. (Shweder, 1990; pp. 7-8) 
 
In contrast, Shweder (1990) emphasizes the intentionality—psychologically constituted 
affordances and constraints—of the test situation, 
The alternative interpretation—the view from cultural psychology—is that mind 
left to its own devices is mindless. … According to the principles of cultural 
psychology, the effects of stuff won’t go away, even in the lab, for there is no 
context-free environment. We are intentional beings who live in an intentional 
world of constituted and represented particulars—domain-specific, concrete, 
subject-dependent, artefactual things. (p. 10)  
 
Such “constituted … things” as the standardized test situation are not neutral; instead, 
processes of cultural selection have imbued them with a psychological charge that 
reflects and serves particular interests.  
 What interests does the construction of the test situation as neutral space serve? The 
phenomenon of stereotype lift suggests that the test situation arises and persists precisely because 
it does important societal work. In particular, standard constructions of the test situation launder 
inequality (Croizet & Millet, 2012). They reproduce the same differential outcomes as the raw 
exercise of power, but do so in a way that legitimizes the resulting inequality as the result of 
differences in intellectual merit (see Jackman, 1994). Indeed, the very notion of raw, internal 
ability—especially as an inherited entity that indicates merit—may itself produce racist 
inequality (see Croizet, 2011 on the “racism of intelligence”). When this notion is in play, it not 
only constitutes an unfair pressure that depresses performance of people with devalued identities, 
but also serves as a performance-enhancing ideology that unfairly inflates the performance of 
people with overvalued identities.  
To help illustrate these ideas, consider discussions about performance-enhancing 
substances in competitions such as the Olympic Games. Implicit in these discussions is an 
understanding of performance as a combination of a performer’s true ability plus the artificial or 
unnatural advantage that a person gains from using a performance-enhancing agent: whether 
substance, piece of equipment, or training technique. All performers rely on some technologies 
of performance enhancement; the question of the legitimacy of their performance rests on 
conventions about which agents are “natural” and permissible, and these conventions vary over 
time and across space. Two points follow. First, it is typically people in positions of power and 
influence who decide on permissibility of different technologies, and the resulting decisions tend 
to institutionalize their self-interested perceptions about which techniques are (un)natural. 
Second, when the performance-enhancing agent is conventionally legitimate, observers are likely 
to perceive the resulting performance as a function of the performer’s ability; to forget the 
contribution of performance-enhancing agents to the production of the meritorious performance; 
25 
 
and to believe that any superior reward based on superior performance constitutes just desserts 
for superior merit. 
We think it instructive to apply the same logic to the case of cultural privilege and 
notions of ability and merit. The superior performance of people from dominant or advantaged 
groups is not so clearly the result of superior natural ability or merit; instead, it reflects the 
imposition of technologies that have evolved via processes of cultural selection to 
disproportionately afford them the possibility of over-performance beyond their natural ability. A 
cultural psychology perspective calls into question the extent to which superior rewards based on 
such (over)performance constitute just desserts. Performance is not just (in the sense of only) a 
reflection of individual ability, but also reflects situations that have evolved to maximize the 
advantage of some individuals over others. Moreover, the processes of selection that drive this 
evolution are not just (in the sense of fair), but instead are biased in favor of the powerful. In 
summary then, one can speak of hegemonic constructions of the test situation as “intentional 
worlds” for domination: apparently “neutral” constructions of reality that (1) are infused with 
dominant group beliefs and desires (e.g., about merit as the source of test scores) and (2) 
systematically reproduce differential outcomes and racial advantage. 
Collective Memory  
As another example, consider work on representations of history and identity (Kurtiş et 
al., 2010; Salter & Adams, 2016). In one direction, corresponding to the sociocultural 
constitution of psychological experience, people build a sense of identity using collective 
constructions of the past that tend to glorify collective triumphs and deny or silence acts of 
collective wrongdoing (e.g., Baumeister & Hastings, 1997; Loewen, 1995; Wertsch, 2002). For 
instance, official representations of history embedded in memorials, museums, and 
commemorative holidays (Carretero & Kriger, 2011; Kurtiş, Adams, & Yellowbird, 2010; 
Mukherjee, Saler, & Molina, 2015; Opotow, 2015) often highlight past glories and conceal 
injustices. In the other direction, corresponding to this section’s focus on the psychological 
constitution of cultural reality, people do not recall the past in neutral or disinterested fashion; 
instead, they selectively re-member and re-produce constructions of the past in ways that address 
present identity concerns (Sahdra & Ross, 2007; Wohl, Branscombe, & Klar, 2006). For 
example, researchers in one study reported that the denial of collective guilt for colonial violence 
in the Congo was greater among Belgian participants from older than younger generations. 
Moreover, this denial of collective guilt was especially pronounced among older-generation 
participants who scored high in national identification (Licata & Klein, 2010). 
To cite other examples from our own research, White American students prefer 
hegemonic commemorations of the American Thanksgiving holiday that glorify European 
colonization of the North American continent: that is, celebrating it as an opportunity to express 
gratitude for fulfillment of divinely ordained destiny while remaining silent about the violent 
destruction of indigenous societies as a result of European colonization (Kurtiş et al., 2010). 
Likewise, White American students prefer relatively hegemonic representations of Black History 
Month (BHM) that emphasize peaceful coexistence in ethnically diverse communities and 
individual achievements of African American heroes, but remain silent about the systems of 
racial domination that required heroic resistance (Salter & Adams, 2016). These preferences 
inform subsequent actions—failure to mention racial violence in one’s own Thanksgiving 
celebrations or BHM assignment—that reconstitute the culturally inscribed silences that in turn 
promote national identification and identity-defensive activity (e.g., denial about racism in 
American society and opposition to antiracist policy; Kurtiş et al., 2010; Nelson, Adams, & 
26 
 
Salter, 2013; Salter & Adams, 2016). From this perspective, the proliferation of nation-
glorifying, racism-denying representations in American society is not an accident or coincidence, 
but instead occurs instead through incremental acts of everyday reproduction by ordinary people 
acting on personal understandings and preferences. 
This section’s emphasis on the psychological constitution of cultural reality focuses on a 
question about which canonical approaches to cultural psychology remain relatively silent: How 
or why do prevailing constructions of reality arise and persist? The conception of cultural 
realities as intentional worlds proposes an answer to this question. Particular constructions of 
reality arise and persist because people selectively reproduce bits of everyday realities that 
resonate with their beliefs and desires. Because these beliefs and desires include a (barely 
conscious) sense of group position or collective interest (Blumer, 1958; Bobo, 1999), the 
institutional structures that define social life are likely to resonate with the collective interest of 
the people with the most power to influence production of cultural reality.  
Although domination sometimes occurs through deliberate acts of direct discrimination 
or conscious exercise of racial power, a cultural psychology analysis suggests that their more 
typical form may be preferential reproduction of apparently “neutral” cultural tools that 
nevertheless have “disparate impact” and reproduce dominant-group advantage. For example, 
relatively innocuous constructions of behavior as choice not only resonate with middle-class 
understandings of action and desires for perceived control, but also “just happen” to reproduce 
racial inequality when people withhold aid or justice from victims because they made bad 
“choices” (e.g., for “choosing” to live in ethnic enclaves or to stay in New Orleans during 
Hurricane Katrina; see Stephens, Hamedani, Markus, Bergsieker, & Eloul, 2009). Similarly, 
models of ideal affect that emphasize high arousal positive states not only resonate with white 
American understandings and desires (Tsai, 2007), but also delegitimize the experience of 
dissatisfaction that often accompanies motivation for social change (Ahmed, 2008; Becker & 
Maracek, 2008). From this perspective, understandings of choice or ideal affect that prevail in 
North American settings (and hegemonic psychological science) are not essentially neutral 
constructions that have unfortunate side-effects; instead, they are dynamically reproduced 
cultural tools that may evolve and persist precisely because they serve interests of domination. 
 
EXTENDING SOCIAL AND PERSONAL IN SOCIAL-PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY 
A primary goal of this chapter has been to extend the social and personal of social-
personality psychology in ways that challenge the prevailing individualism of hegemonic 
psychological science. In keeping with the reductionist roots and Euro-American colonial 
character of psychological science, social-personality psychologists have typically retreated to 
atomistic philosophical positions that portray social phenomena as the aggregate of separate 
individual experience. In contrast, a cultural psychology analysis illuminates a more collective 
understanding of mind, not in the sense of a collective entity with its own motivations or 
intentions (Allport, 1924); nor merely in the sense of individual motivations and intentions when 
collective identity is salient (as in self-categorization theory; Turner et al., 1987); but instead in 
the sense of intentional worlds: motivation and intention deposited as psychological traces into 
the structure of everyday cultural ecologies. The key to this extension is an emphasis on the 
history and materiality of persons and situations. 
Regarding the former, a cultural psychology analysis emphasizes the extent to which 
species-general, community-specific, or individual patterns reflect the sociocultural constitution 
of personal experience: the inscription of context in person as one engages and acquires the 
27 
 
psychological charge of ecologically embedded, cultural tools. From this perspective, even the 
sense of abstracted independence that informs hegemonic psychological science is not “just 
natural,” but instead is a social product that reflects the historical evolution of cultural 
technologies (i.e., independent selfways) that promote and maintain it. In particular, a cultural 
psychology perspective suggests that independent selfways have their foundation in the 
unprecedented affluence of North American settings associated with past and ongoing resource 
extraction and (neo)colonial appropriation. A cultural psychology perspective informed by 
perspectives of the Majority World reveals that the naturalization of “independent selfways” 
within hegemonic accounts of psychological science reflects and promotes the interests of a 
privileged minority of people in Western, Educated, Industrial, Rich, Democratic (a.k.a. WEIRD; 
Henrich et al., 2010) settings at the expense of the marginalized majority of humanity.  
Regarding the latter, a cultural psychology analysis emphasizes the extent to which situations 
and everyday ecologies reflect the psychological constitution of cultural realities: that is, the 
infusion of person in context as people imaginatively re-make material realities into which they 
invest their beliefs and desires. Humans do not exist in a natural environment, but instead inhabit 
cultural ecologies that bear the accumulated, material sediment from a social history of human 
activity. Besides avoiding pitfalls of an exclusive emphasis on environmental determinants of 
action (see Reicher & Haslam, 2006; Wrong, 1961), this emphasis on the psychological 
constitution of cultural realities extends the “personal” in social-personality psychology beyond 
the narrow concern with embodied dispositions to emphasize more enduring manifestations of 
personal agency embedded in everyday intentional worlds (Gjerde, 2004). From this perspective, 
one should locate the power of the person not only in proximal self-direction of momentary 
experience, but also (and more profoundly) in the imaginative capacity to construct intentional 
worlds (i.e., ecological manifestations of person in context) that provide distal or “culturally 
mediated” forms of self-regulation, even in the absence of proximal self-direction. 
28 
 
Acknowledgments 
We thank the Culture and Psychology Research Group at the University of Kansas and Hazel 
Rose Markus for valuable suggestions on an earlier draft. Glenn Adams acknowledges the 
influence of innumerable conversations with fellows at the Center for Advanced Study in the 
Behavioral Sciences at Stanford University, and he is grateful for the Center’s support. 
Address correspondence concerning this article to Glenn Adams, Department of Psychology, 
University of Kansas, 1415 Jayhawk Blvd., Lawrence, KS 66045–7556. Email: adamsg@ku.edu. 
29 
 
References 
Adams, G. (2005). The cultural grounding of personal relationship: Enemyship in North 
American and West African worlds. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 948–
968. 
Adams, G., Anderson, S. L., & Adonu, J. K. (2004). The cultural grounding of closeness and 
intimacy. In D. Mashek & A. Aron (Eds.), The handbook of closeness and intimacy (pp. 321–
339). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Adams, G., Biernat, M., Branscombe, N. R., Crandall, C. S., & Wrightsman, L. S. (2008). 
Beyond prejudice: Toward a sociocultural psychology of racism and oppression. In G. 
Adams, M. Biernat, N. R. Branscombe, C. S. Crandall, & L. S. Wrightsman (Eds.), 
Commemorating Brown: The social psychology of racism and discrimination (pp. 215–246). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
Adams, G., Bruckmüller, S., & Decker, S. (2012). Agency in context: Ecologies of abundance 
and scarcity. International Perspectives in Psychology: Research, Practice, Consultation, 1, 
141-153. 
Adams, G., & Dzokoto, V. A. (2007). Genital-shrinking panic in Ghana: A cultural-
psychological analysis. Culture and Psychology, 13, 83–104 
Adams, G., & Dzokoto, V. A. (2003). Self and identity in African studies. Self and Identity, 2, 
345–359. 
Adams, G. & Kurtiş, T. (2015). Friendship and gender in cultural-psychological perspective: 
Implications for research, practice, and consultation. International Perspectives in 
Psychology: Implications for Research, Practice, and Consultation, 4, 182-194. 
Adams, G., Kurtiș, T., Salter, P. S., & Anderson, S. L. (2012). A cultural psychology of 
relationship: Decolonizing science and practice. In O. Gillath, G. Adams, & A. D. Kunkel 
(Eds.), Relationship science: Integrating across evolutionary, neuroscience and sociocultural 
approaches (pp. 49–70). Washington DC: American Psychological Association. 
Adams, G., & Markus, H. R. (2004). Toward a conception of culture suitable for a social 
psychology of culture. In M. Schaller & C. S. Crandall (Eds.), Psychological foundations of 
culture (pp. 335–360). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Adams, G., & Plaut, V. C. (2003). The cultural grounding of personal relationship: Friendship in 
North American and West African worlds. Personal Relationships, 10, 333–348. 
Adams, G., & Salter, P. S. (2007). Health psychology in African settings: A cultural 
psychological analysis. Journal of Health Psychology, 12, 539–551. 
Adams, W. M. & Mulligan, M. (2003). Introduction. In W.M. Adams & M. Mulligan (Eds.), 
Decolonizing nature: Strategies for conservation in a post-colonial era. (pp. 1-15). London: 
Earthscan Publications.  
Ahmed, S. (2008). Multiculturalism and the promise of happiness. New Formations, 63, 121–
137. 
Allport. F. H. (1924). The group fallacy in relation to social science. Journal of Abnormal and 
Psychology and Social Psychology, 19, 60–73. 
Anderson, B. (1983). Imagined communities: Reflections on the origin and spread of 
nationalism. London: Verso. 
Anderson, S. L., Adams, G., & Plaut, V. C. (2008). The cultural grounding of personal 
relationship: The importance of attractiveness in everyday life. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 95, 352–368. 
Arnett, J. J. (2002). The psychology of globalization. American Psychologist, 57, 774–783. 
30 
 
Arnett, J. J. (2008). The neglected 95%: Why American psychology needs to become less 
American. American Psychologist, 63, 602–614. 
Bakhtin, M. (1981). The dialogic imagination: Four essays by M. M. Bakhtin (M. E. Holquist, 
Ed., C. Emerson & M. Holquist, Trans.). Austin: University of Texas Press. 
Bargh, J. A. (1997). The automaticity of everyday life. In R. S. Wyer Jr. (Ed.), Advances in 
social cognition (Vol. 10, pp. 1–61). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (1999). The unbearable automaticity of being. American 
Psychologist, 54, 462–479. 
Bartlett, F. C. (1932). Remembering: A study in experimental and social psychology. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Baumeister, R. F. (1987). How the self became a problem: A psychological review of historical 
research. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 163–176. 
Baumeister, R. F., & Hastings, S. (1997). Distortions of collective memory: How groups flatter 
and deceive themselves. In J. W. Pennebaker, D. Paez, & B. Rime (Eds.), Collective memory 
of political events: Social psychological perspectives (pp. 277–293). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Becker, D., & Maracek, J. (2008). Dreaming the American dream: Individualism and positive 
psychology. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 2, 1767–1780. DOI: 
10.1111/j.1751–9004.2008.00139.x 
Bellah, R., Madsen, R., Sullivan, W., Swindler, A., & Tipton, S. (1985). Habits of the heart: 
Individualism and commitment in American life. New York: Harper & Row. 
Berger, P. L., & Luckmann, T. (1966). The social construction of reality: A treatise in the 
sociology of knowledge. Garden City, NY: Anchor Books. 
Billig, M. (1995). Banal nationalism. London: Sage. 
Bledsoe, C. (1990). No success without struggle: Social mobility and hardship for foster children 
in Sierra Leone. Man, 25, 70–88. 
Blumer, H. (1958). Race prejudice as a sense of group position. Pacific Sociological Review, 1, 
3–7. 
Bobo, L. D. (1999). Prejudice as group position: Microfoundations of a sociological approach to 
racism and race relations. Journal of Social Issues, 55, 445–472. 
Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a theory of practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Bregman, A. S. (1990). Auditory scene analysis: The perceptual organization of sound. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Bruner, J. (1990). Acts of meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Carretero, M. & Kriger, M. (2011). Historical representations and conflicts about indigenous 
people as national identities. Culture & Psychology, 17, 177-195. 
 Chiu, C. Y., Gelfand, M., Yamagishi, T., Shteynberg, G., & Wan, C. (2010). Intersubjective 
culture: The role of intersubjective perceptions in cross-cultural research. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 5, 482–493. 
Cialdini, R. B., Borden, R. J., Thorne, A., Walker, M., Freeman, S., & Sloan, L. (1976). Basking 
in reflected glory: Three (football) field studies. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 34, 366–375. 
Clark, A., & Chalmers. D. J. (1998). The extended mind. Analysis, 58, 7-19. 
Coe, C. (2011). What is love? The materiality of care in Ghanaian transnational families. 
International Migration, 49, 7-24. 
31 
 
Cohen, D., Nisbett, R. E., Bowdle, B. F., & Schwarz, N. (1996). Insult, aggression, and the 
Southern culture of honor: An “experimental ethnography.” Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 70, 945–960. 
Cole, J. (2001). Forget colonialism? Sacrifice and the art of memory in Madagascar. Berkeley: 
University of California Press. 
Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. 
Coltrane, S. (2000). Research on household labor: Modeling and measuring the social 
embeddedness of routine family work. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 62, 1208-1233. 
Comaroff, J., & Comaroff., J. L. (2012). Theory from the South: Or, how Euro-America is 
evolving toward Africa. Anthropological Forum: A Journal of Social Anthropology and 
Comparative Sociology, 22, 113–131. 
Cousins, S. D. (1989). Culture and selfhood in Japan and the U.S. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 56, 124–131. 
Croizet, J. С. (2008). The pernicious relationship between merit assessment and discrimination in 
education. In G. Adams, M. Biernat, N. R. Branscombe, С. S. Crandall, & L. S. Wrightman 
(Eds.), Commemorating Brown: The social psychology of racism and discrimination (pp. 
153–172). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
Croizet, J. C. (2011). The racism of intelligence: How mental testing practices have constituted 
an institutionalized form of group domination. In H. L. Gates (Ed.), Handbook of African 
American citizenship. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Croizet, J. C., & Millet, M. (2012). Social class and test performance: From stereotype threat to 
symbolic violence aand vice versa. In M. Inzlicht & T. Schmader (Eds.), Stereotype threat: 
Theory, process, and application (pp. 188-201). New York: Oxford University Press. 
De Sousa Santos, B. (2014). Epistemologies of the South: Justice against epistemicide. Paradigm 
Publishers. 
Devine, P. G. (1989). Stereotypes and prejudice: Their automatic and controlled components. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 56, 5–18. 
Dodge, K. A., & Crick, N. R. (1990). Social information-processing bases of aggressive behavior 
in children. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 16, 8–22. 
Dodoo, F. N.-A. (1998). Marriage type and reproductive decisions: A comparative study in sub-
Saharan Africa. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 60, 232–242. 
Downey, G., Freitas, A. L., Michaelis, B., & Khouri, H. (1998). The self-fulfilling prophecy in 
close relationships: Rejection sensitivity and rejection by romantic partners. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 545–560. 
Durrheim, K., & Dixon, J. (2004). Attitudes in the fiber of everyday life: The discourse of racial 
evaluation and the lived experience of desegregation. American Psychologist, 59, 626–636. 
Dweck, C. S., Hong, Y., & Chiu, C. Y. (1993). Implicit theories: Individual differences in the 
likelihood and meaning of dispositional inference. Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 19, 644–656. 
Eid, M., & Diener, E. (2001). Norms for experiencing emotions in different cultures: Inter- and 
intranational differences. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 869–885. 
Endo, Y., & Meijer, Z. (2004). Autobiographical memory of success and failure experiences. In 
Y. Kashima, Y. Endo, E. S. Kashima, C. Leung, & J. McClure (Eds.), Progress in Asian 
social psychology (Vol. 4, pp.67–84). Seoul, Korea: Kyoyook-Kwahak-Sa Publishing 
Company. 
32 
 
Erikson, E. H. (1968). Identity: Youth and crisis. New York: Norton. 
Ferme, M. C. (2001). The underneath of things: Violence, history, and the everyday in Sierra 
Leone. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Ferguson, J. (2006). Global shadows: Africa in the neoliberal world order. Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press. 
Fiske, A. P. (1991). Structures of social life: The four elementary forms of social relations: 
Communal sharing, authority ranking, equality matching, and market pricing. New York: 
Free Press. 
Fiske, A., Kitayama, S., Markus, H. R., & Nisbett, R. E. (1998). The cultural matrix of social 
psychology. In D. Gilbert & S. Fiske & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of social 
psychology (4th ed., pp. 915–981). San Francisco: McGraw-Hill. 
Fiske, A. & Schubert, L. (2012). How to relate to people: The extraterrestrial’s guide to Homo 
sapiens. In O. Gillath, G. Adams, & A. Kunkel (Eds.), Relationship science: Integrating 
evolutionary, neuroscience, and sociocultural approaches (pp. 169–195). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association. 
Geissler, P.W. (2013). Public secrets in public health: Knowing not to know while making 
scientific knowledge. American Ethnologist, 40, 13-34. 
Geschiere, P. (1997). The modernity of witchcraft: Politics and the occult in postcolonial Africa. 
Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press. 
Gibson, J. J. (1977). The theory of affordances. In R. Shaw & J. Bransford (Eds.), Perceiving, 
acting, and knowing: Toward an ecological psychology (pp. 67–82). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Giddens, A. (1991). Modernity and self-identity: Self and society in the late modern age. 
Cambridge, UK: Polity. 
Gjerde, P. F. (2004). Culture, power, and experience: Toward a person-centered cultural 
psychology. Human Development, 47, 138–157. 
Goff, P. A., Steele, C. M., & Davies, P. G. (2008). The space between us: Stereotype threat and 
distance in interracial contexts. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 94, 91–107. 
Goffman, E. (1959). The presentation of self in everyday life. New York: Anchor Books. 
Goody, E. (1982). Parenthood and social reproduction: Fostering and occupational roles in 
West Africa. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Gosling, S. D., Ko, S., J., Mannarelli, T., & Morris, M. E. (2002). A room with a cue: Personality 
judgments based on offices and bedrooms. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 
379–398. 
Greenfield, P. M., Keller, H., Fuligni, A., & Maynard, A. (2003). Cultural pathways through 
universal development. Annual Review of Psychology, 54, 461–490. 
Greenfield, P. M., Maynard, A. E., & Martí, F. A. (2009). Implications of commerce and 
urbanization for the learning environments of everyday life: A Zinacantec Maya family 
across time and space. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 40, 935–952. 
Griffin, D., & Ross, L. (1991). Subjective construal, social inference, and human 
misunderstanding. In M. P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 
24, pp. 319–359). San Diego, CA: Academic. 
Grosfoguel, R. (2002). Colonial difference, geopolitics of knowledge, and global coloniality in 
the modern/colonial capitalist world-system. Review, 25(3), 203-334. 
Hammack, P. L. (2008). Narrative and the cultural psychology of identity. Personality and 
Social Psychology Review, 12, 222–247. 
33 
 
Hardin, C. D., & Higgins, E. T. (1996). Shared reality: How social verification makes the 
subjective objective. In R. Sorrentino & E. T. Higgins (Eds.), Handbook of motivation and 
cognition (Vol. 3, pp. 28–84). New York: Guilford. 
Hawkins, S. (2002). Writing and colonialism in Northern Ghana: The encounter between the 
LoDagaa and “The world on paper,” 1892–1991. Toronto: University of Toronto Press. 
Heath, C., Bell, C., & Sternberg, E. (2001). Emotional selection in memes: The case of urban 
legends. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 1028–1041. 
Heine, S. J., & Hamamura, T. (2007). In search of East Asian self-enhancement. Personality and 
Social Psychology Review, 11, 1–24. 
Heine, S. J., Kitayama, S., Lehman, D. R., Takata, T., Ide, E., Leung, C., et al. (2001). Divergent 
consequences of success and failure in Japan and North America: An investigation of self-
improving motivations and malleable selves. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
81, 599–615. 
Heine, S. J., Lehman, D. R., Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1999). Is there a universal need for 
positive self-regard? Psychological Review, 106, 766–794. 
Heckenberger, M. J., (2005). The ecology of power: Culture, place and personhood in the 
Southern Amazon, A.D. 1000-2000. New York: Routledge. 
Henrich, J., Boyd, R., Bowles, S., Camerer, C., Fehr, E., & Gintis, H., et al. (2005). “Economic 
man” in cross-cultural perspective: Behavioral experiments in 15 small-scale societies. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28, 795–855. 
Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). The weirdest people in the world? 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33, 61–83. 
Hermans, H. J. M. (2001). The dialogical self: Toward a theory of personal and cultural 
positioning. Culture and Psychology, 7, 243–281. 
Hermans, H. J. M., & Kempen, H. J. G. (1998). Moving cultures: The perilous problems of 
cultural dichotomies in a globalizing society. American Psychologist, 53, 1111–1120. 
Higgins, E. T. (1996). The “self digest”: Self-knowledge serving self-regulatory functions. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 1062–1083. 
Higgins, E. T. (1997). Beyond pleasure and pain. American Psychologist, 52, 1280–1300.  
Holland, D., & Eisenhart, M. (1990). Educated in romance: Women, achievement, and college 
culture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Holland, D. & Lave, J. (2001). History in person: An introduction. In D. Holland  & J. Lave 
(Eds.), History in person: Enduring struggles, contentious practice, intimate identities (pp. 3-
33). Santa Fe, NM, USA: School of American Research Press.  
Inkeles, A. (1969). Making men modern: On the causes and consequences of individual change 
in six developing countries. American Journal of Sociology, 75(2), 208-225.  
Inkeles, A. & Smith, D. (1974). Becoming modern. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Jackman, M. R. (1994). The velvet glove: Paternalism and conflict in gender, class, and race 
relations. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Jackson, M. S. (1982). Allegories of the wilderness: Ethics and ambiguity in Kuranko narratives. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
Kağıtçıbaşı, Ç. (1996). Family and human development across cultures: A view from the other 
side. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Kağıtçıbaşı, Ç., & Ataca, B. (2005). Value of children and family change: A three-decade 
portrait from Turkey. Applied Psychology, 54, 317–337. 
34 
 
Karp, D. R., Jin, N., Yamagishi, T., & Shinotsuka, H. (1993). Raising the minimum in the 
minimal group paradigm. Japanese Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 32, 231–
240. 
Karpinski, A., & Hilton, J. L. (2001). Attitudes and the implicit association test. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 774–788. 
Kashima, Y. (2000). Conceptions of culture and person for psychology. Journal of Cross-
Cultural Psychology, 31, 14–32. 
Kashima, E. S., & Kashima, Y. (1998). Culture and language: The case of cultural dimensions 
and personal pronoun use. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 29, 461–486. 
Keller, H. (2003). Socialization for competence: Cultural models of infancy. Human 
Development, 46, 288–311. 
Keller, H., Schölmerich, A., & Eibl-Eibesfeldt, I. (1988). Communication patterns in adult-infant 
interactions in Western and non-Western cultures. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 19, 
427–445. 
Kelley, H. H., & Stahelski, A. J. (1970). Social interaction basis of cooperators’ and competitors’ 
beliefs about others. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 16, 66–91. 
Kim, H., & Markus, H. R. (1999). Deviance or uniqueness, harmony or conformity? A cultural 
analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 785–800. 
Kim, H. S., & Sherman, D. K. (2007). “Express yourself”: Culture and the effect of self-
expression on choice. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 1–11. 
Kim, H. S., Sherman, D. K., & Taylor, S. E. (2008). Culture and social support. American 
Psychologist, 63, 518–526. 
Kitayama, S., Ishii, K., Imada, T., Takemura, K., & Ramaswamy, J. (2006). Voluntary settlement 
and the spirit of independence: Evidence from Japan’s “Northern frontier.” Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 369–384. 
Kitayama, S., Markus, H. R., & Kurokawa, M. (2010). Culture, emotion, and well-being: Good 
feelings in Japan and the United States. Cognition and Emotion, 14, 93–124. 
Kitayama, S., Markus, H. R., Matsumoto, H., & Norasakkunkit, V. (1997). Individual and 
collective processes in the construction of the self: Self-enhancement in the United States and 
self-criticism in Japan. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 72, 1245–1267. 
Kraus, M. W., Piff, P. K., Mendoza-Denton, R., Rheinschmidt, M. L., & Keltner, D. (2012). 
Social class, solipsism, and contextualism: How the rich are different from the poor. 
Psychological Review, 119, 546–572. 
Kurtiş, T. & Adams, G. (2015a). Interdependence and relationality across dimensions of culture 
and gender. Psychology and Society, 7, 29-50. 
Kurtiş, T. & Adams, G. (2015b). Decolonizing liberation: Toward a transnational feminist 
psychology. Journal of Social and Political Psychology: Special Thematic Section on 
Decolonizing Psychological Science, 3, 388-413. 
Kurtiş, T. & Adams, G. (2013). Toward a study of culture suitable for (Frontiers) in Cultural 
Psychology. Frontiers in Cultural Psychology, 4, 392-393. 
Kurtiș, T., Adams, G., & Yellow Bird, M. (2010). Generosity or genocide? Identity implications 
of silence in American Thanksgiving commemorations. Memory, 18, 208–224. 
Kühnen, U., Hannover, B., & Schubert, B. (2001). The semantic-procedural interface model of 
the self: The role of self-knowledge for context-dependent versus context-independent modes 
of thinking. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 397–409. 
35 
 
Kühnen, U., & Oyserman, D. (2002). Thinking about the self influences thinking in general: 
Cognitive influences of salient self-concept. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 
492–499. 
Lau, I. Y. M., Chiu, C. Y., & Lee, S.-I. (2001). Communication and shared reality: Implications 
for the psychological foundations of culture. Social Cognition, 19, 350–371. 
Lee, A. Y., Aaker, J. L., & Gardner, W. L. (2000). The pleasures and pains of distinct self-
construals: The role of interdependence in regulatory focus. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 78, 1122–1134. 
Lee, F., Hallahan, M., & Herzog, T. (1996). Explaining real life events: How culture and domain 
shape attributions. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22, 732–741. 
Lentz, C. (2006). Ethnicity and the making of history in Northern Ghana. Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press. 
LeVine, R. A., Dixon, S., LeVine, S., Richman, A., Leiderman, P. H., Keefer, C. H., et al. 
(1994). Child care and culture: Lessons from Africa. New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Lewis, M. W., & Wigen, K. E. (1997). The myth of continents: A critique of metageography. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
Licata, L. & Klein, O. (2010). Holocaust or benevolent paternalism? Intergenerational 
comparisons on collective memories and emotions about Belgium’s colonial past. 
International Journal of Conflict and Violence, 4(1), 45-57. 
Lipsitz, G. (1998). The possessive investment in Whiteness: How White people profit from 
identity politics. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.  
Loewen, J. (1995). Lies my teacher told me: Everything your American history textbook got 
wrong. New York: Touchstone. 
Lohmann, A., Arriaga, X. B., Goodfriend, W. (2003). Close relationships and placemaking: Do 
objects in a couple’s home reflect couplehood? Personal Relationships, 10, 437–449. 
Maldonado-Torres, N. (2007). On the coloniality of being. Contributions to the development of a 
concept. Cultural Studies, 21, 240-270. 
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and self: Implications for cognition, emotion, and 
motivation. Psychological Review, 98, 224–253. 
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (2004). Models of agency: Sociocultural diversity in the 
construction of action. In V. Murphy-Berman & J. J. Berman (Eds.), Nebraska symposium on 
motivation: Vol. 49. Cross-cultural differences in perspectives on self (pp. 1–57). Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press. 
Markus, H. R., Mullally, P. R., & Kitayama, S. (1997). Selfways: Diversity in modes of cultural 
perception. In U. Neisser & D. A. Jopling (Eds.), The conceptual self in context: Culture, 
experience, self-understanding. The Emory symposia in cognition. (pp. 13–61). New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Markus, H. R., Ryff, C. D., Curhan, K. B., & Palmersheim, K. A. (2004). In their own words: 
Well-being at midlife among high school educated and college-educated adults. In O. G. 
Brim, C. D. Ryff, & R. C. Kessler (Eds.), How healthy are we? A national study of well-
being at midlife (pp. 273–319). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Markus, H. R., Uchida, Y., Omoregie, H., Townsend, S. S. M., & Kitayama, S. (2006). Going for 
the gold: Models of agency in Japanese and American contexts. Psychological Science, 17, 
103–112. 
36 
 
Masuda, T., & Nisbett, R. E. (2001). Attending holistically vs. analytically: Comparing the 
context sensitivity of Japanese and Americans. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 81, 922–934. 
Matsumoto, D. (1999). Culture and self: An empirical assessment of Markus and Kitayama’s 
theory of independent and interdependent self-construal. Asian Journal of Social Psychology, 
2, 289–310. 
McAdams, D. P. (2001). The psychology of life stories. Review of General Psychology, 5, 100–
122. 
McArthur, L. Z., & Baron, R. M. (1983). Toward an ecological theory of social perception. 
Psychological Review, 90, 215–238. 
McCrae, R. R., & Allik, J. (Eds.) (2002). The five-factor model of personality across cultures. 
New York: Kluwer. 
McIntyre, A., Lyons, A., Clark, A. E., & Kashima, Y. (2004). The microgenesis of culture: Serial 
reproduction as an experimental simulation of cultural dynamics. In M. Schaller, & C. S. 
Crandall (Eds.), The psychological foundations of culture (pp. 227–258). Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum. 
Mead, G. H. (1934). Mind, self, and society (Charles W. Morris, Ed.) Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
Mesquita, B. (2001). Emotions in collectivist and individualist contexts. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 80, 68–74. 
Meyer, B. (1998). The power of money: Politics, sorcery, and Pentecostalism in Ghana. African 
Studies Review, 41, 15–38. 
Mignolo , W. D. (2009). Epistemic disobedience, independent thought, and decolonial freedom. 
Theory, Culture, and Society, 26, 159–181. 
Miller, J. G. (1984). Culture and the development of everyday social explanation. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 46, 961–978. 
Mischel, W. (1968). Personality and assessment. New York: Wiley. 
Morling, B., Kitayama, S., & Miyamoto, Y. (2002). Cultural practices emphasize influence in the 
United States and adjustment in Japan. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 311–
323. 
Morling, B., & Lamoreaux, M. (2008). Measuring culture outside the head: A meta-analysis of 
cultural products. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 12, 199–221. 
Morelli, G. A., Rogoff, B., Oppenheim, D., & Goldsmith, D. (1992). Cultural variation in 
infants’ sleeping arrangements: Questions of independence. Developmental Psychology, 28, 
604–613. 
Moscovici, S. (1984). The phenomena of social representations. In R. M. Farr & S. Moscovici 
(Eds.), Social representations (pp. 3–69). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press 
Mukherjee, S., Salter, P. S., & Molina, L. E. (2015). Museum spaces as psychological 
affordances: representations of immigration history and national identity. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 6, 692. http://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00692  
Nelson, J.C., Adams, G., & Salter, P.S. (2013). The Marley Hypothesis: Racism denial reflects 
ignorance of history. Psychological Science, 24(2), 213-218.  
Nisbett, R. E., Peng, K., Choi, I., & Norenzayan, A. (2001). Culture and systems of thought: 
Holistic vs. analytic cognition. Psychological Review, 108, 291–310. 
37 
 
Norenzayan, A., & Atran, S. (2004). Cognitive and emotional processes in the cultural 
transmission of natural and nonnatural beliefs. In M. Schaller & C. Crandall (Eds.), The 
psychological foundations of culture (pp 149–169). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Norenzayan, A., Smith, E. E., Kim, B. J., & Nisbett, R. E. (2002). Cultural preferences for 
formal versus intuitive reasoning. Cognitive Science, 26, 653–684. 
Oishi, S., Diener, E., Scollon, C. N., & Biswas-Diener, R. (2004). Cross-cultural consistency of 
affective experiences across cultures. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86, 460–
472. 
Oishi, S., Ishii, K., & Lun, J. (2009). Residential mobility and conditionality of group 
identification. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45, 913–919. 
Oishi, S., & Kisling, J. (2009). The mutual constitution of residential mobility and individualism. 
In R. S. Wyer Jr., C-Y. Chiu, Y. Y. Hong, & S. Shavitt (Eds.), Understanding culture: 
Theory, research, and application (pp. 223–238). New York: Psychology Press. 
Oishi, S., Schug, J., Yuki, M., & Axt, J. (2015). The psychology of residential and relational 
motilities. In M. J. Gelfand, C.-Y. Chiu, & Y.-Y. Hong (Eds.), Handbook of advances in 
culture and psychology, 5, (pp. 221–272). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Okazaki, S., David, E. J. R., & Abelmann, N. (2007). Colonialism and psychology of culture. 
Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 2, 90–106.  
Opotow, S. (2015). Historicizing injustice: The museum of memory and human rights, Santiago, 
Chile. Journal of Social Issues, 71, 229-243. 
 Oppong, C. (1973). Growing up in Dagbon. Tema, Ghana: Ghana Publishing Corporation. 
Oppong, C. (1974). Marriage among a matrilineal elite: A family study of Ghanaian senior civil 
servants. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Oyserman, D., Coon, H. M., & Kemmelmeier, M. (2002). Rethinking individualism and 
collectivism: Evaluation of theoretical assumptions and meta-analyses. Psychological 
Bulletin, 128, 3–72. 
Pasupathi, M. (2001). The social construction of the personal past and its implications for adult 
development. Psychological Bulletin, 127, 651–672. 
Peng, K., & Nisbett, R. E. (1999). Culture, dialectics, and reasoning about contradiction. 
American Psychologist, 54, 741–754. 
Plaut, V. C., Adams, G., & Anderson, S. (2009). Does attractiveness buy happiness? “It depends 
where you’re from.” Personal Relationships, 16, 619–630. 
Prentice, D. A., Miller, D. T., & Lightdale, J. R. (1994). Asymmetries in attachments to groups 
and to their members: Distinguishing between common-identity and common-bond groups. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 20, 484–493. 
Quijano, A. (2000). Coloniality of power, Eurocentrism, and Latin America. Nepentla: Views 
From the South, 1(3), 533-580. 
Radcliffe-Brown, A. (1940). On joking relationships. Africa, 13, 195–210. 
Reicher, S., & Haslam, A. S. (2006). On the agency of individuals and groups: Lessons from the 
BBC prison study. In T. Postmes & J. Jetten (Eds.), Individuality and the group: Advances in 
social identity (pp. 237–257). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Reicher, S., & Hopkins, N. (2001). Self and nation. London: Sage. 
Reisman, P. (1992). First find your child a good mother. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutledge 
University Press. 
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in social context. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
38 
 
Rosenthal, R., & Jacobson, L. (1968). Pygmalion in the classroom. New York: Holt, Rinehart, 
and Winston. 
Ross, L. (1977). The intuitive psychologist and his shortcomings. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), 
Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 10, pp.173–220). New York: Academic. 
Ross, L. D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). The person and the situation: Perspectives of social 
psychology. New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Rothbaum, F., Weisz, J., Pott, M., Miyake, K., & Morelli, G. (2000). Attachment and culture: 
Security in the United States and Japan. American Psychologist, 55, 1093–1104. 
Rozin, P. (2007). Food and eating. In S. Kitayama & D. Cohen (Eds.). Handbook of cultural 
psychology (pp. 391–416). New York: Guilford. 
Sahdra, B., & Ross, M. (2007). Group identification and historical memory. Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 33, 384–395. 
Said, E. W. (1978). Orientalism. New York: Vintage. 
Salter, P. S. and Adams, G. (2016). On the intentionality of cultural products: Representations of 
Black History as psychological affordances. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 1166. doi: 
10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01166  
Salter, P. S. & Adams, G. (2012). Mother or wife? An African dilemma tale and the 
psychological dynamics of social change. Social Psychology, 43, 232-242. 
Savani, K., Markus, H. R., & Conner, A. L. (2008). Let your preference be your guide? 
Preferences and choices are more tightly linked for North Americans than for Indians. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 861–876. 
Schaller, M., Conway, L. G., & Tanchuk, T. L. (2002). Selective pressures on the once and 
future contents of ethnic stereotypes: Effects of the communicability of traits. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 861–877. 
Schelling, T. C. (1984). Choice and consequence: Perspectives of an errant economist. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Schug, J., Yuki, M., & Maddux, W. (2010). Relational mobility explains between- and within-
culture differences in self disclosure to close friends. Psychological Science, 21, 1471-1478.  
Scribner, S., & Cole, M. (1981). The psychology of literacy. London: Harvard University Press. 
Segall, M. H., Campbell, D. T., & Herskovits, M. J. (1963). Cultural differences in the 
perception of geometric illusions. Science, 139, 769–771. 
Shaw, R. (2000). “Tok af, lef af”: A political economy of Temne techniques of secrecy and self. 
In I. Karp & D. A. Masolo (Eds.), African philosophy as cultural inquiry (pp. 25–49). 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 
Shweder, R. A. (1990). Cultural psychology: What is it? In J. Stigler, R. Shweder, & G. Herdt 
(Eds.), Cultural psychology: Essays on comparative human development (pp. 1–46). 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Shweder, R. A., Goodnow, J., Hatano, G., Levine, R. A., Markus, H. R., & Miller, P. (2006). The 
cultural psychology of development: One mind, many mentalities. In W. Damon (Ed.), 
Handbook of child development (5th ed., Vol. 1, pp. 865-937). New York: Wiley. 
Shweder, R. A., Jensen, L. A., & Goldstein, W. M. (1995). Who sleeps by whom revisited: A 
method for extracting the moral goods implicit in practice. In J. J. Goodnow, P. J. Miller, & 
F. Kessel (Eds.), Cultural practices as contexts for development: New directions for child 
development (pp. 21–39). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
39 
 
Sinclair, S., Lowery, B. S., Hardin, C. D., & Colangelo, A. (2005). Social tuning of automatic 
racial attitudes: The role of affiliative motivation. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 89, 583–592. 
Singelis, T. M., Bond, M. H., Lai, S. Y., & Sharkey, W. F. (1999). Unpacking culture’s influence 
on self-esteem and embarrassability: The role of self-construals. Journal of Cross-Cultural 
Psychology, 30, 215–331. 
Skitka, L. J. (2005). Patriotism or nationalism? Understanding post–September 11, 2001 flag-
display behavior. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 35, 1995–2011. 
Snibbe, A. C., & Markus, H. R. (2005). You can’t always get what you want: Educational 
attainment, agency, and choice. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 703–720. 
Snyder, M., Tanke, E. D., Berschied, E. (1977). Social perception and interpersonal behavior: On 
the self-fulfilling nature of social stereotypes. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
35, 656–666. 
Steele, C. M. (1997). A threat in the air: How stereotypes shape intellectual identity and 
performance. American Psychologist, 52, 613–629. 
Stephens, N. M., Hamedani, M. G., Markus, H. R., Bergsieker, H. B., & Eloul, L. (2009). Why 
did they “choose” to stay? Perspectives of Hurricane Katrina observers and survivors. 
Psychological Science, 20, 878–886. 
Suh, E. M. (2002). Culture, identity consistency, and subjective well-being. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 83, 1378–1391. 
Suh, E. M., Diener, E., Oishi, S., & Triandis, H. C. (1998). The shifting basis of life satisfaction 
judgments across cultures: Emotions versus norms. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 74, 482–493. 
Talhelm, T., Zhang, X., Oishi, S. Duan, D., & Kitayama, S. (2014). Large-scale psychological 
differences within china explained by rice versus wheat agriculture. Science, 344, 603–608. 
Tengan, E. (1991). The land as being and cosmos: The institution of the Earth Cult among the 
Sisaala of northern Ghana. Frankfurt, Germany: Peter Lang. 
Tomasello, M. (1999). A puzzle and a hypothesis. In The cultural origins of human cognition 
(pp. 1–12). Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Triandis, H. C., Bontempo, R., Villareal, M. J., Asai, M., & Lucca, N. (1988). Individualism and 
collectivism: Cross-cultural perspectives on self-ingroup relationships. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 323–338. 
Trouillot, M. R. (1995). Silencing the past: Power and the production of history. Boston: Beacon 
Press. 
Tsai, J. L., (2007). Ideal affect: Cultural causes and behavioral consequences. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 2, 242–259. 
Tsai, J. L., Louie, J. Y., Chen, E. E., Uchida, Y. (2007). Learning what feelings to desire: 
Socialization of ideal affect through children’s storybooks. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 33, 17–30. 
Turner, J. C., Hogg, M. A., Oakes, P. J., Reicher, S. D., & Wetherell, M. S. (1987). 
Rediscovering the social group: A self-categorization theory. Oxford: Blackwell. 
United Nations Development Program (2010). The real wealth of nations: Pathways to human 
development (Human Development Report 2010). New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Uskul, A., Nisbett, R., & Kitayama, S. (2008). Ecoculture, social interdependence and holistic 
cognition: Evidence from farming, fishing and herding communities in Turkey. 
Communicative & Integrative Biology, 1, 40-41. 
40 
 
van der Geest, S. (2009). Anyway! Lorry inscriptions in Ghana. In J.-B. Gewald, S. Luning, & 
K. van Walraven (Eds.), The speed of change: Motor vehicles and people in Africa, 1890–
2000 (pp. 253–293). Leiden, Netherlands: Brill. 
Vandello, J. A., & Cohen, D. (2004). When believing is seeing: Sustaining norms of violence in 
cultures of honor. In M. Schaller & C. Crandall (Eds.), The psychological foundations of 
culture (pp. 281–304). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological processes. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Wang, Q., & Brockmeier, J. (2002). Autobiographical remembering as cultural practice: 
Understanding the interplay between memory, self, and culture. Culture and Psychology, 8, 
45–64. 
Walton, G. M., & Cohen, G. L. (2003). Stereotype lift. Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 39, 456–467. 
Weisner, T. S. (2005). Commentary: Attachment as a cultural and ecological problem with 
pluralistic cultural and ecological solutions. Human Development, 48, 89–94. 
Wertsch, J. V. (2002). Voices of collective remembering. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Wilson, A. E., & Ross, M. (2003). The identity function of autobiographical memory: Time is on 
our side. Memory, 11, 137–149. 
Winachakul, T. (1994). Siam mapped: A history of the geo-body of a nation. Honolulu: 
University of Hawaii Press. 
Wohl, M. J. A., Branscombe, N. R., & Klar, Y. (2006). Collective guilt: Emotional reactions 
when one’s group has done wrong or been wronged. European Review of Social Psychology, 
17, 1–37. 
Word, C. O., Zanna, M. P., & Cooper, J. (1973). The nonverbal mediation of self-fulfilling 
prophecies in interracial interaction. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 10, 109–120. 
Wright, S. C., & Lubensky, M. (2008). The struggle for social equality: Collective action vs. 
prejudice reduction. In S. Demoulin, J. P. Leyens & J. F. Dovidio (Eds.), Intergroup 
misunderstandings: Impact of divergent social realities. (pp. 291–310). New York: 
Psychology Press. 
Wrong, D. H. (1961). The oversocialized conception of man in modern sociology. American 
Sociological Review, 26, 183–193. 
Yamagishi, T., Jin, N., & Kiyonari, T. (1999). Bounded generalized reciprocity: In-group 
favoritism and in-group boasting. Advances in Group Processes, 16, 161–197. 
Ybarra, O., & Trafimow, D. (1998). How priming the private self or collective self affects the 
relative weights of attitudes or subjective norms. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
24, 362–370. 
Yuki, M. (2003). Intergroup comparison versus intragroup relationships: A cross-cultural 
examination of social identity theory in North American and East Asian cultural contexts. 
Social Psychology Quarterly, 66, 166–183. 
Yuki, M. & Schug, J. (2012). Relational mobility: A socio-ecological approach to personal 
relationships. In O. Gillath, G.E. Adams, & A.D. Kunkel (Eds.), Relationship science: 
Integrating evolutionary, neuroscience, and sociocultural approaches (pp. 137-152). 
Washington D.C.: American Psychological Association. 
41 
 
                                                 
1 Indeed, in Shweder’s (1990) defining statement of a cultural psychology analysis, he cites the work of Ross and 
Nisbett as one of the multidisciplinary sites where ideas compatible with a cultural psychology analysis flourish. 
2 Ross and Nisbett also noted a third principle of “tension systems” but, unlike the other two themes, did not devote 
a separate chapter to it. Although they undoubtedly meant it in more senses, this third principle is evident in the 
mutual constitution framework as a dynamic-tension relationship between the other two principles. 
3 By hegemonic, we refer to particular understandings and ways of being that originally derived from European 
(American) experience, but by projection of colonial power have become the default or natural standard for global 
humanity and mainstream academic work. 
4 For an extended discussion of this idea, see the original chapter (Adams, 2012) in the first edition of this handbook. 
View publication stats
