JOU R N AL 
OP
Personality
Social Psychology
Copyright © 1977 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
Volume 35
November 1977
Number 11
Psychology and the American Ideal
Edward E. Sampson
Department of Sociology
Clark University
Three recent criticisms of personality and social psychology are noted: the
historical, the dialectical, and the interdependence theses These three theses
are applied to a critical examination of existing trends in theory and practice,
in particular to concepts of androgyny, of mental health, and of moral develop-
ment. The position is developed that existing conceptions in these and other
areas emphasize a cultural and historical thesis of self-contained individualism;
syntheses of opposing or desirable characteristics are located within the person
rather within an interdependent collectivity. By viewing these and other psycho-
logical concepts against this background, we can better understand that (a)
these (e.g., androgyny) are not fundamental psychological principles; (b) alter-
native conceptualizations are both possible and perhaps even more desirable;
and (c) in an era in which collective problem solving is necessary, the perpet-
uation of self-contained, individualistic conceptions can stifle psychology's ef-
forts to contribute to resolving contemporary social issues
A review of the emerging critique of so-
cial and personality psychology reveals three
important theses: historical, dialectical, and
interdependence. I will first briefly examine
each of these, next use them as the basis
for a critical analysis of the ideal social
character contained within psychology's the-
ories, and finally probe the broader impli-
cations of this ideal for psychology's role in
social problem solving.
The Historical Thesis
Gergen (1973) offers one of the clearest
statements of the historical thesis:
In essence, the study of social psychology is pri-
marily an historical undertaking. We are essentially
engaged in a systematic account of contemporary
affairs . . 
. I n this light, it is a mistake to con-
sider the processes in social psychology as basic in
the natural science sense. Rather, they may largely
be considered the psychological counterpart of cul-
tural norms (pp 316; 318)
~T 
" 
! 
. 
,. . 
t t 
_ . 
" 
According to this thesis, psychology (social
Requests for reprints should be sent to Edward 
° 
. 
. , . . 
. 
t J V nc
E Sampson, Department of Sociology, Clark Uni- 
psychology in particular) is the study of
versity, Worcester, Massachusetts 10610. 
contemporary social history; our ideas arise
767
768
EDWARD E. SAMPSON
within and refer back to the historical con-
text of their use and are not to be consid-
ered 
fundamental 
in 
the 
natural-science
sense. Our concepts are not literal (i.e., con-
text free) but rather are indexical (see Bar-
Hillel, 
1954; 
Garfinkel, 
1967; 
Wilson,
1970); their meaning depends on knowing
something about the context of their origin
and use. Gergen qualifies his analysis, how-
ever, suggesting that some phenomena we
study are historically durable and resistant
to contextual influence, while other phenom-
ena, the less durable, are affected by their
historical context.
Recently, I applied the historical thesis to
the examination of the concepts of justice as
equity and as equality (Sampson, 1975b). I
noted that while both conceptions had his-
torical precedents, an equity principle of
justice and human relationships was especi-
ally congruent with a capitalistic economic
system. The latter connection between a
supposedly fundamental social-psychological
principle (equity) and a contemporary eco-
nomic system has been noted by several
others as well (e.g., Bakan, 1966; Block,
1973). Here we see that our ideas and com-
prehension of human social behavior are
better understood as historically located prin-
ciples rather than as psychological universals
describing fundamental 
aspects of human
behavior.
The Dialectical Thesis
The dialectical view has recently been
stated by Riegel (1976). While he has re-
stricted himself to an examination of a dia-
lectical approach in developmental psychol-
ogy, his ideas and his manifesto are clearly
intended to apply more broadly to all
branches of the discipline A dialectical ver-
sion of psychology is concerned with "the
study of actions and changes" (Riegel, 1976,
p. 696), with conflict and 
contradiction
rather than with equilibrium or stability.
A dialectical analysis searches for those con-
tradictions that create individual and cultural
growth and development.
Rychlak (1968) had earlier offered an in-
sightful 
analysis 
of 
dialectical 
thinking
within personality psychology. It was his
contention that "dialectical terminology pre-
sents us with the most accurate picture of the
fundamental 
human condition" 
(Rychlak,
1968, p. 255). A dialectical perspective ar-
gues that we grow through a process of be-
coming; that this process consists of a
series of oppositions; our status at any one
time is the synthesis of previous theses and
antitheses; each synthesis, however, is sim-
ply another part of this ever emerging pro-
cess; it forms another thesis, and so forth.
Carlson (1972) likewise has called for the
use of a dialectical principle in the study
of personality. She suggests that the polari-
ties of psychological understanding 
(e.g.,
masculine-feminine; agency-communion; in-
strumental-expressive) "are not merely ends
of a scale, but qualities coexisting within the
individual" (Carlson, 1972, p. 22). Carlson
continues by noting that such polarities
have received little conceptual elaboration and vir-
tually no serious attention as frameworks for in-
quiry on personality dynamics Since polarities have
pi oven useful 
intellectual tools elsewhere in the
social sciences and humanities . . . 
it is surprising
that psychologists have neglected the heuristic value
of making explicit the dynamic aspects of polarities
hidden in currently popular formulations, (p. 22)
In Carlson's thinking, as with the other
dialectical approaches, polarities are con-
nected by a relationship of oppositeness;
they imply tension, and "their integration is
a developmental task for the individual and
for a viable social group" (Carlson, 1972,
p. 20). This type of dialectical formulation
has recently been expressed in Bern's con-
cept of psychological androgyny (Bern, 1974.
1975). One and the same person embodies
both masculine and feminine qualities; an-
drogyny is presumably the synthesis of these
opposing tendencies. I return to this ex-
ample in a later section of this article.
The Thesis of Interdependence
The thesis of interdependence has been
clearly stated recently by Pepitone (1976)
His analysis echoes the earlier formulations
found in the symbolic interactionist ap-
proaches (e.g., Blumer, 1966; Mead, 1934)
I
PSYCHOLOGY AND THE AMERICAN IDEAL
769
and also in the Lewinian field-theoretical
approach (Lewin, 1951). Pepitone questions
the adequacy of a purely individual psy-
chology that ignores the normative aspects
of behavior. Individuals are the interde-
pendent parts of larger systems; the de-
terminants or sources of behavior are said
to be characteristics of these interdependent,
collective systems. In concert with the Mead-
Blumer model, Pepitone argues that "the
causes of behavior cannot be clearly and
validly specified unless one defines the con-
tours of the system or unity in which the
causal processes operate" (1976, p. 642).
Basically, the thesis of interdependence ar-
gues that a purely individual psychology can-
not "account for a large portion of the be-
havior that social psychologists try to ex-
plain" (p. 652). Given this inadequacy,
Pepitone argues for "a reorientation in both
theory and research methodology" (p. 652),
so that psychology can more adequately rep-
resent the collective, interdependent 
(and
normative) determinants of most behavior.
A complete development of the argument
in support of these three theses can be found
in the original articles and supplementary
material to which I have referred. It is not
my aim to develop further the cases or docu-
mentation that each author has provided.
Rather, my goal in this article is to use
these three theses and their relationships to
examine what I feel to be an important con-
clusion regarding the main thrust and im-
plication of much of social and personality
psychology. Each thesis directs our attention
to a particular shortcoming and necessary
modification of our existing ways of thinking.
I would like to begin my own analysis
concretely by focusing these three principles
on the emerging theories of male and female
role behavior, in particular the concept of
androgyny. It should be understood that I
have selected this focus for illustrative pur-
Poses; it does not represent the only area in
which this analysis can be applied. An-
drogyny does represent a useful case ex-
ample, however, one that should facilitate
°ur understanding the larger implications of
'he analysis. But before we deal with this
example, we must first establish a founda-
tion: the cultural ethos or climate within
which this concept and others have emerged.
Self-Contained Individualism
According to the historical thesis, we must
turn to our contemporary society in order to
more fully grasp the cultural and historical
bases for our psychological concepts. Al-
though there is no definitive contemporary
history upon which we can draw, a predomi-
nant theme that describes our cultural ethos
is self-contained individualism. Our culture
emphasizes individuality, in particular a kind
of individual self-sufficiency that describes
an extreme of the individualistic dimension.
This individualistic theme led Gergen, for
example, to comment that "if our values were
otherwise, social conformity could be viewed
as prosolidarity behavior" (1973, p. 312)
and Pepitone to note that his arguments in
support of the interdependence 
principle
"may not be persuasive to social psycholo-
gists raised in the (highly normative) in-
dividualistic tradition" (1976, p. 643). Un-
der the rubric of egocentrism, Hogan (1975)
has examined several important aspects of
this individualistic cultural and psychological
perspective:
It seems clear that the dominant temper of Ameri-
can psychology, particularly in those branches that
deal with the whole person, his development, and
his social behavior, is wedded to an individualistic
perspective 
. 
To the degree that this is true,
much American psychology can be plausibly de-
scribed as theoretically egocentric (p 534)
Many aspects of the recent debate over
Campbell's article on the genetics of altruism
can be understood within this context (see
Campbell, 1975, for the original statement
and the May 1976 issue of the American
Psychologist [Vol. 31, pp. 341-384J 
for
further aspects of the debate). Several critics
have noted that human interdependency is
culturally built into the organism and does
not require a genetic argument to support it
(e.g., Goldschmidt, 1976) and, furthermore,
that there is no necessary opposition be-
tween egoism (i.e., individualism) and cul-
770
EDWARD E. SAMPSON
ture. Campbell's own position, however, de-
velops from an individualistic perspective
that opposes egoism against altruism. From
this view, it appears as though culture is
lined up against the individual, but in this
case, the confrontation is beneficial, as cul-
ture compels otherwise egoistic persons to
behave altruistically.
This issue is highlighted in a quotation
from Bryan (1972), who notes some of the
costs of altruism:
A helpful person may well be intrusive (e g., invade
our privacy), moralistic (eg., prevent us from
"doing our thing"), or simply conforming to the
status quo of proprieties 
. . a helpful person with
all of his "good" intentions may well violate a
variety of personal freedoms that we cherish, (pp
101-102)
This passage clearly contains the opposition
posited between prosocial acts and individual
freedom. This opposition, however, flows
from an individualistically oriented cultural
ethos. The ideas, "invasion of privacy" or
"being prevented from doing our own thing,"
are statements whose meaning is understand-
able within an individualistic context; they
would be alien within a more collectivistic
cultural ethos. Egoism and altruism are in
opposition only in an individualistic setting;
their opposition is not written in granite,
genetics, or our fundamental human psy-
chology.
The self-contained quality of contempo-
rary individualism has been recognized by
several persons (e.g., Sampson, 1975a, espe-
cially Chapter 9; Sobo, 1975, refers to this
quality as narcissism). The self-contained
person is one who does not require or desire
others for his or her completion or life; self-
contained persons either are or hope to be
entire unto themselves. Self-containment is
the extreme of independence: needing or
wanting no one. It is fundamentally anti-
thetical to the concept of interdependence.
Although self-contained individualism is an
extreme, it is not unreasonable as a descrip-
tion of an emerging cultural ideal, at least
among certain segments of contemporary
American society. It forms the basis of our
national energy policy, in which self-suf-
ficiency is an oft-stated goal. It forms the
pattern of behavior of many persons, many
of whom wish to contain within their own
household units the multitude of products
that they are unwilling to share on a larger,
community-wide basis.
I am reminded of a Sunday morning radio
program I recently heard. The clergyman
was reporting the results of a discussion he
had conducted with several groups of young
people. He gave them a problem to deal
with in their small discussion groups: De-
scribe an ideal community that was con-
scious of energy conservation. The young
people indicated that this ideal community
would be one in which each family had sev-
eral cars, a washer, dryer, several television
sets, high-fi equipment, lawnmowers, and so
forth. Their ideal also included several less
material matters, but products comprised an
important part of their ideal community
The clergyman asked them why their ideal
needed so much duplication of equipment,
why several households could not have a
shared, central supply depot. Their near-
unanimous reply was that cooperation and
sharing of that sort would be too difficult
One need only think of university depart-
ments, which like that ideal community, at-
tempt to gather unto themselves their own
arsenal of supplies and equipment. Likewise,
we are reminded of Hardin's analysis of
the tragedy of the commons (1968) as well
as Platt's recent analysis of social traps and
social fences (1973). In all of these, self-
interest directs individuals to gather as much
as they can for themselves, disregarding the
larger costs to others and to the sense of
community. It would appear that the clergy-
man's young people are not simply reflecting
an adolescent stage of development, but
rather something more fundamental to their
culture, an ethos which adults share.
Androgyny: The Dialectical Synthesis
The dialectical thesis in personality and
social psychology has recently emerged in
the context of masculinity and femininit}
or Bakan's (1966) analysis of agency and
communion. In both cases, we have two
PSYCHOLOGY AND THE AMERICAN IDEAL
771
polarities and a unifying, ideal synthesis.
The synthesis for Bern (1974, 1975) and
for Spence, Helmreich, and Stapp (1975)
involves androgyny, an integration of mascu-
line and feminine qualities. For Bakan, this
synthesis involves a balancing of agency and
communion.
Bern has argued that the androgynous
pattern may "come to define a more human
standard of psychological health" 
(1974,
p. 1962). Androgyny increases the individ-
ual's flexibility and ability to deal with situa-
tions that are both masculine and feminine
in their press. She notes that sex-typing re-
stricts "one's behavior in unnecessary and
perhaps even dysfunctional ways" (Bern &
Lenney, 1976, p. 53). Spence et al. (1975)
argue and present supportive data that indi-
cate that high self-esteem corresponds with
a more androgynous orientation. Likewise,
Bakan's (1966) analysis suggests that agency
needs to be controlled by communion and
vice versa.
It appears, therefore, that one of the
most important areas of recent theory and
research in which the dialectical thesis has
been pursued involves the case of androgyny.
The opposition and conflict between qualities
is recognized, as is their synthesis. Further-
more, research that tests this formulation
finds it a more useful way of understanding
sex-related behavior than the previous non-
dialectical formulations.
Dialectics and the Cultural Ideal
The combination of the historical and the
dialectical perspectives, when applied to the
case of androgyny, highlights the thesis of
this article. The dialectical synthesis that
androgyny is said to represent is congruent
with an individualistic principle; on its sur-
iace and in its analysis, androgyny, as a val-
ued individual synthesis of masculine and
ieminine characteristics, is incongruent with
the thesis of interdependence. The ideal per-
son is androgynous, a self-contained male-
and-female, one who has balanced within
him- or herself the principles of agency and
communion. An individualistic perspective
•eads us to locate the dialectical synthesis
within the individual rather than within an
interdependent system of which the individ-
ual is a part. Thus the union of the historical
and the dialectical theses in this and numer-
ous other instances brings us into a direct
conflict with the third critique, the thesis of
interdependence.
If we began with a different historical per-
spective, however, we could arrive at a dia-
lectical synthesis that is consistent with a
principle of interdependence. Suppose that
rather than sharing a highly individualistic,
self-contained ethos, we lived in a time or
a place in which a more collectivistic ethos
pervaded. According to the historical thesis,
we would expect our theories of human be-
havior to reflect this ethos. As Gergen (1973)
has noted, under a collectivist historical and
cultural ethos, we would probably interpret
all highly individualistic or self-contained
human tendencies as alienating and as op-
posed to social integration. The self-con-
tained, androgynous individual might well
turn out to be the cultural alien rather than
the ideal.
This latter possibility of an alternative
social arrangement was contained in Bene-
dict's (1970) early view of a highly syner-
gistic society, it is also a part of Deutsch's
(1949) view of a cooperative, promotively
interdependent relationship. Benedict's highly
synergistic society is one in which
the individual's goals of self-interest are related to
collective goals of mutual benefit 
. . personal re-
wards are intimately tied into collective rewards;
one attains personal goals, thus, by means of mu-
tual, joint action. In such societies, one person's
gain is everyone's gain (Sampson, 1976, p. 83)
Contrasting, low-synergy societies are those
"in which personal gain is something pri-
vately sought, separable from mutual benefit
for all" (Sampson, 1976, p. 83).
It would seem reasonable to suggest that
in a more collectivistic (highly synergistic)
cultural milieu, dialectical syntheses would
more likely be located within an interde-
pendent 
system 
rather 
than 
necessarily
within the individual. In this view, androgy-
nous individuals who are entirely self-con-
tained would be excessively atomistic and
772
EDWARD E. SAMPSON
isolated from their fellow human beings;
they would not be the cultural ideal.
This is an important point. What I am
suggesting, using androgyny as my illus-
trative example, is that two rather differing
perspectives regarding the location of the
synthesis between opposing sex-role tenden-
cies can be developed. The first perspective,
fitting a self-contained individualistic society,
locates such syntheses within the individual.
Its cultural ideal therefore is the person who
contains unto him- or herself all the es-
teemed and valued qualities of the culture.
In this case, each person contains the best of
the male and the best of the female charac-
teristics. An alternative perspective, fitting
a more collectivistic, highly synergistic so-
ciety, locates the syntheses between oppos-
ing qualities within the interdependent col-
lectivity. The cultural ideal is the person who
at some level recognizes his or her inter-
dependency with others in order to achieve
satisfaction and completion as a human
being.
The androgynous ideal, therefore, fits our
contemporary historical and cultural context
but conflicts with the third critical thesis
regarding interdependence. In this connec-
tion, it is important to note that I am not
disputing the research findings involving an-
drogyny and self-esteem and androgyny and
improved adaptability. I am attempting to
locate these outcomes in their proper his-
torical and cultural context and view them
thereby as syntheses that are uniquely suited
to our contemporary individualistic and self-
contained ideal.
Likewise, by placing the concept of an-
drogyny within its historical and cultural
setting, we can see that androgyny is neither
a necessary, an inevitable, nor a fundamen-
tally more desirable psychological quality.
Within a culture that emphasizes self-con-
tained individuality, the androgynous in-
dividual may be described as having achieved
the cultural ideal, as contrasted with per-
sons who are sex-typed as masculine or
feminine. An alternative social system, one
of high synergy, might very well prefer a
more sex-typed ideal and find the androgy-
nous character to be least well adapted to
the cultural matrix.
Interdependent Dialectical Syntheses
We will shortly examine other implications
that follow from a self-contained individual-
istic perspective, as compared with an inter-
dependent alternative. But first, let us ex-
amine what is meant by locating a synthesis
of opposing characteristics within the sys-
tem of interdependent persons rather than
within one individual. First, we note that
both Carlson (1972) and Riegel (1976) in-
troduce a dialectical analysis that allows as
one possibility a synthesis that is located
within an interdependent relationship rather
than within the individual as such. For ex-
ample, Carlson states:
Here one must be prepared to consider manifesta-
tions of polarities: (a) at different levels (e.g,
conscious/unconscious) within the person, (b) in
developmental sequences (e.g, psychosocial crises),
and (c) in transactions with other persons and
situations (e g , resolution of male-female polarity in
heterosexual love. (1972, p. 23)
Carlson's third point (c) contains the es-
sential idea that polarities may be synthe-
sized between two interdependent persons;
thus, she implies that syntheses are not
necessarily or inevitably to be located within
the single individual. The androgynous solu-
tion to the male-female polarity, therefore,
may be only one of several solutions. That it
is held up as ideal seems more to reflect a
self-contained, individualistic historical and
cultural pattern than any fundamental psy-
chological principle.
Riegel (1976) introduces the concept of
an outer dialectic to convey the same pos-
sibility of locating dialectical syntheses be-
tween interdependent persons, in addition to
syntheses within the single individual. Rif
gel's example of the orchestra offers us one
useful model for such interdependent syn-
theses.
Bales' analysis of group leadership prove;
especially instructive in further 
clarifying
the meaning and some implications of lo-
cating a dialectical synthesis within an inter-
PSYCHOLOGY AND THE AMERICAN IDEAL
773
dependent system (Bales, 1955, 1958). Al-
though his dialectically opposed principles
are not directly formulated as masculine
versus feminine, Bales' emphasis on the in-
strumental functions of leadership on the
one hand and the expressive functions on
the other readily lends itself to a masculine-
feminine, agency-communion interpretation.
It was Bales' contention (with substan-
tial supporting research data) that the in-
strumental and expressive functions were suf-
ficiently opposed in their operation that it
was rare to find what he termed the great
man leader: that is, a single person who em-
bodied both functions. The most likely syn-
thesis for leadership was found in two spe-
cialist types within a given group: the task
specialist 
(instrumental 
functions 
empha-
sized) and the maintenance specialist (ex-
pressive functions 
emphasized). In other
words, Bales located the synthesis between
the two opposing functions within the inter-
dependent group of persons rather than
within any one individual. His leadership
ideal is really not the great man but rather
the interdependent system that effectively
utilizes the two kinds of specialists.
We learn several important lessons from
Bales' work. First, we are reminded that our
focus is on functions and not necessarily on
traits of particular persons. This is especially
important to recognize in the area of sex-
role behavior. There is no requirement that
females perform "expressive functions" nor
that males perform "instrumental functions."
Who performs what functions is a different
issue. What is important, however, is that
sets of functions be performed and integrated
(i.e., the synthesis) and that the performance
and its synthesis need not be (and rarely
are) the entire province of a single in-
dividual.
The second lesson we learn from Bales in-
volves the distribution or location of func-
tions. Leadership functions need not be nor
are they typically all performed by the
designated leader. The performance is car-
ried on within the interdependent collectivity
and not by any one individual. To state this
in a slightly different way, what we can now
see clearly are at least two alternative possi-
bilities for locating instrumental and expres-
sive functions:
1. The opposing functions and their syn-
thesis can be located entirely within the
same individual. But as Bales notes, this is
a very rare and unusual pattern, and, fur-
thermore, it may not even be the most de-
sirable pattern.
2. The opposing functions and their syn-
thesis can be located within an interde-
pendent system. Bales suggests the emer-
gence of role specialists, each of whom em-
phasizes one function; together they provide
the necessary synthesis for the group.
Although it would take us beyond the
scope of the present article, it is important
for us to note still another possibility, vary-
ing as a function of temporal rather than the
spatial (i.e., location) factor we have been
discussing. This temporal possibility is sug-
gested by Carlson (her second point [bj in
the previous discussion of her work). It has
also been suggested by Hogan (1976). The
essential idea is that a person may accom-
plish a synthesis of opposing characteristics
at different parts of his or her life cycle.
For example, agency may dominate early in
life to be replaced by communion later in
life. Given this temporal possibility, it would
seem even more restrictive to insist that
syntheses be not only located within the in-
dividual but also at a particular moment of
his or her life cycle.
Undoubtedly, other alternatives are pos-
sible. The point, however, is that the loca-
tion of the synthesis within the individual is
only one of several possibilities. There is no
fundamental requirement that this be so;
rather, the assumed desirability of locating
masculine-feminine syntheses within the in-
dividual, to continue with our example, seems
to reflect the historical and cultural ethos of
self-contained individualism. In emphasizing
androgyny in this way, social and personality
psychology is presenting an ideal, which,
though 
congruent 
with 
existing 
cultural
themes, is not the only possibility, nor for
that matter perhaps even the most desirable
possibility.
774
EDWARD E. SAMPSON
Psychology acts as though it has discov-
ered something fundamental about persons;
it holds this something aloft as an ideal to
be achieved. By ignoring the cultural and
historical conditions that present this as the
ideal, it fails to provide an adequate assess-
ment of alternatives or the implications that
derive from its ideal. For example, does self-
contained individualism offer a reasonable
way of dealing with the massive problems
that confront a complex and interdependent
world?
It seems that we have adopted only one
form of synthesis as the preferred mode, in
part because we are blinded by our own cul-
tural heritage and have difficulty in seeing
its impact on our formulations, in part be-
caue we have few theories or methods that
direct us towards alternative formulations.
What I am saying, therefore, is that within
an individualistic 
historical and cultural
ethos, the self-contained individual, the an-
drogynous type for example, is the ideal.
In an alternative system, however, that same
character is neither ideal nor perhaps de-
sirable. Androgyny as a sign of good health
thereby reflects an individualistic social ar-
rangement in which persons wish to be self-
contained and self-sufficient in order to be
successful.
I am also implying (and will shortly ex-
amine this point) that a self-contained in-
dividualism that recommends androgyny as
the ideal has not been empirically demon-
strated to be a healthful or productive social
arrangement. All that has been empirically
demonstrated is the usefulness of androgyny
in our existing cultural pattern. But if that
pattern itself is opposed to health, then so
too is any specific manifestation of it, such
as androgyny. If anything, to reinforce this
as the ideal seems to contribute to further
human isolation and alienation and to thwart
necessary cooperative ventures that build
upon and recognize the needs of interde-
pendence for their solution. Authoritarian
systems of governance would seem most
likely if the self-contained ideal is fully
realized. How else to govern this group of
excessive individualists?
The ideal in an interdependent framework
is not the one individual who has accom-
plished a synthesis within him- or herself;
the ideal is to be able to work out one's
personal function in harmony with others
who are working out theirs. And all of this
occurs in recognition that one's actions are
vital to the maintenance of the collective
enterprise. This will sound excessively Uto-
pian only to self-contained, 
individualist
ears. It is not excessively Utopian, but rather
descriptive of a different cultural and his-
torical 
ethos 
in 
which 
interdependence
rather than independence is the dominating
theme.
Psychology's Self-Contained 
Individualism:
Further Examples
The perspective I am proposing differs
from the usual point of view within social
and personality psychology. Adrogyny is only
one example of the individualist cultural
press to locate the ideal synthesis within
individuals rather than within interdependent
systems. We will briefly examine several
other cases. What we are looking for are
statements regarding the psychological ideal
that reveal a self-contained or individualistic
image. These related ideals describe the in-
dividual as the possessor of all the valued
qualities of the culture or see collective en-
deavors as thwarting individual self-realiza-
tion.
The Teacher-Scholar
Perhaps this is not so much a psychologi-
cal thesis as it is a dominant perspective
within which most academics do their work.
Thus, it serves as the background culture,
which undoubtedly plays a part in affecting
the conceptions we formulate. The model is
of the teacher-scholar, the one person who
embodies within him- or herself the full
range of perhaps opposing qualities that
compose being a good teacher and a good
scholar. This ideal is not simply the result
of our apparent abhorrence of specialization,
rather it seems to reflect a more profound
and worrisome abhorrence of interdepend-
PSYCHOLOGY AND THE AMERICAN IDEAL
775
ence, of locating the synthesis of opposing
qualities within interdependent collectivities
and not inevitably nor even desirably within
the individual. Universities long for their own
great man or woman and have difficulty in
approving either the scholar who cannot or
will not teach or the teacher who cannot or
will not perform scholarship.
Mental Health
In general, our contemporary views of
mental health emphasize a self-contained, in-
dividualistic ideal: The person who possesses
all the qualities from whatever listing of posi-
tive traits we choose, for example, self-ac-
tualization, autonomy, or mastery (Jahoda,
19S8). We have difficulty in thinking of these
traits as functions that can be located within
an interdependent collectivity rather than
within the single individual. Thus, the bur-
den for good health is the individual's; he
or she must come to possess all that is good
and desirable.
What would health and illness look like,
however, if we envisioned these in interde-
pendent terms? In this formulation, we
would not expect the individual as such to
be the repository of all that was good,
healthful, and desirable, but we would seek
health or illness within the larger, collective
unit. This conception is not new to propo-
nents of family therapy. The labeled sick
patient (e.g., child) is said to represent some
attribute of the larger family system; treat-
ment must be oriented towards that system
and not solely the individual member. We
are reminded here of one of Lewin's own
principles: "The re-educative process has to
fulfill a task which is essentially equivalent
to a change in culture" (Lewin & Grabbe,
1945, p. 59). What Lewin was pointing out
was the basic interdependency that linked
person with person. As Benne (1976) has
recently noted:
Counseling and therapy have traditionally sought to
facilitate change in persons with little or no as-
sumption of responsibility for facilitating changes
in the cultural environment in which people func-
tion outside the counseling or therapeutic setting
This tends to place the entire burden of behavioral
adjustment or adaptation upon the individual.
There is now a tendency to involve significant
other persons and their common culture in the
process of re-examination, re-evaluation and com-
mitment to change along with the person who has
felt the environmental stress most deeply, (p. 33)
Only a self-contained, individualistic model
locates so much within the person and places
so great a burden of responsibility on the
person for his or her transformation back
into health. The interdependent thesis would
argue, as we have noted, that health and ill-
ness are aspects of larger systems and are not
located entirely within the single person.
There are implications of this formulation
for both theory and practice. Our theories
in particular would have to reflect alterna-
tives to a self-contained, individualistic per-
spective. We would note that one healthful
possibility, but not the only one nor neces-
sarily the most desirable one, involves the
individual who contains the totality of posi-
tive (healthful) 
qualities. An alternative,
however, would be people who contain only
some healthful qualities; they must be lo-
cated in supportive and completing contexts
with others who contain other kinds of
healthful qualities so that all may mutually
benefit. Once we think in these terms, we
can take a new look at treatment programs
such as Alcoholics Anonymous, Synanon, or
even halfway houses, to name but a few.
Our tendency has been to see these pro-
grams in individualistic terms; we see them
as substituting a somewhat healthful de-
pendency on the group for a disturbed de-
pendency on alcohol, drugs, or delinquent
behavior. But, we still think of these as
only halfway stations on the way to full
independence. And we see the person with
continuing dependence on them as weak or
not fully "cured." The formulation I am
developing sees these in more interdependent
terms; they are not halfway stations, but
full and important completions for an inter-
dependent mode of living together. They re-
flect an important and I think healthful syn-
thesis, one, however, that is seen in less than
a fully positive light because of our cultural
emphasis on a self-contained individualism.
In other words, mental health need not be
776
EDWARD E. SAMPSON
seen in terms of independent functioning for
the individual, but rather interdependent
functioning for a collective unit or group of
persons. No one member contains all the
healthful qualities, but the group as an on-
going unit does. The individual is not seen
to be any the weaker or less secure because
of his or her interdependencies on others for
maintenance, but rather can be seen as ac-
complishing an alternative cultural ideal, one
that may even prove to be more beneficial in
the long run.
Socialization
We are eager to help persons become
autonomous and independent. Our socializa-
tion goals try to facilitate persons' emerg-
ence from their embeddedness in the family,
in school, and in other collective settings to
take their place, on their own two feet, as
autonomous (self-contained) individuals. We
seem to prefer independence to interdepend-
ence, even though some lip service is paid
to the latter. Few efforts are directed toward
training in interdependence; our goals are
to accomplish our cultural ideal, the self-con-
tained individual who in many respects no
longer requires his or her collective roots to
provide guidance.
Some of my own research 
(Sampson,
Fisher, Angel, Mulman, & Sullins, Note 1),
later confirmed by Mantell (1974), provides
an excellent reflection of this particular view.
My study compared indicted Vietnam war
draft resisters with military cadets (Man-
tell's comparison group were Green Berets);
data and conclusions suggested the impor-
tance of autonomous and independent think-
ing as a basic foundation to becoming a re-
sister. The cadet and Green Beret groups
were dependent on their group standards and
culture. From one perspective, we would
argue, as I did, that the "good person," the
"moral person," the "responsible person" is
one who can think and act independently of
his or her group contexts; who can evaluate
issues by separating self from group. Is this
not also Kohlberg's (1968, 1969) ideal, the
person who has transcended his or her own
culture and collectivity, who is able to rea-
son, to formulate, and to think in broader
terms? Recently Hogan (1975) and Riegel
(1976) reached a similar conclusion about
the Kohlberg-Piaget formulations.
I think it reasonable now to moderate my
own earlier conclusion by locating it squarely
within its proper historical and cultural con-
text. Independence from group pressure may
be a necessary prerequisite to "moral" rea-
soning and behavior in an individualistic
ethos, but this does not mean that we have
discovered a universally true, fundamental
fact 
concerning 
individual 
psychological
functioning. Thus, we would have to take ex-
ception not only to what my own and Man-
tell's work has implied but also to the impli-
cation of Kohlberg's and others' analyses of
moral development.
In what cultural and historical context
does the greatest good involve being able to
break apart from one's collective base to
stand 
alone, self-sufficient 
and 
self-con-
tained? In the context of an individualistic
society, in which individualism and self-con-
tainment is the ideal, the person who most
separates self from the group is thereby seen
as embodying that ideal most strongly; the
person who remains wedded to a group is
not our esteemed ideal.
We can take this line of analysis one step
further. The very cognitive capabilities that
are said to be required to take distance and
separate self from group and thereby facili-
tate progressive moral development operate
within the context of an ethos that values
and emphasizes individualism. To be sure,
Kohlberg has tempered his scheme with a
universalistic 
set 
of 
standards 
regarding
human welfare, but the main thrust of the
cognitive—developmental 
argument involves
the person's capacity to remove self from
group embeddedness. I add, parenthetically,
that these cognitive abilities not only reflect
a kind of self-contained individualism, but
moreover a masculine (that is, agentic) the-
sis as well. It should come as no surprise,
however, that a masculine cultural ideal is
adopted as though it were a universal cul-
tural ideal. That is, masculine-agentic cog-
nitive abilities to separate self from others
PSYCHOLOGY AND THE AMERICAN IDEAL
777
are taken to be an ideal rather than the al-
ternative 
feminine-communal 
abilities 
to
merge self with other. But, again, does this
not simply reflect a historical and cultural
emphasis and not something more funda-
mental in the human condition?
What would a high level of moral devel-
opment be, however, in a more collectivist
arrangement? Would we not think of an
individual who is skillful in forever seeing
self as separate from group as a less than
desirable character? Would we not be in-
clined to view the most moral character as
the person who was most in concert with his
or her group's own ideals?
We are well aware of the degree to which
the development of abstract cognitive abili-
ties helps persons take distance from and
separate from others; such abilities help us
avoid merging with objects and others. And
yet, if we take those abilities to their ex-
treme, they would represent, in a collective
cultural system, persons who were incapable
of merging with their groups, of seeing their
own interests and the group's interests to be
coincident. In other words, the cognitive-
developmental thesis itself is rooted to a
self-contained, individualistic context; as it
is applied, therefore, to issues of moral
growth and development, it disposes us to
view the moral ideal as one who can stand
up in defiance of the group and collective
rather than as one who can successfully work
within the interdependent context of the
group. Furthermore, to emphasize separating
rather than uniting cognitive capabilities is
to reinforce an agentic principle over a com-
munal principle; the masculine ideal is im-
posed as the ideal.
Culturally, we are fearful of this kind of
group-based loyalty and collectivism. But
converting this fear into a theory about
some fundamental, objective psychological
truth regarding human growth and develop-
ment seems misguided; it is but another
reflection of our individualistic cultural bias
creeping into our theories of human behavior.
It is within a heavily individualistic system
that we pit individual against group and
come out rooting for the success of the in-
dividual over the group. This does mark our
present era; indeed our cheers are not with-
out merit in many cases. But we do our sci-
ence a disservice if we believe that this is
an inevitability carved in granite, for then
we fail to see the historical individualism
(and agency) of our perspective and fail to
offer helpful alternatives (e.g., a more col-
lectivist view). And, as we propagate our
views in the guise of psychological truths,
we may even be contributing to the destruc-
tion of necessary cooperation and interde-
pendence.
Equity Theory
I, among others, have already examined
how certain aspects of equity theory con-
tinue to reflect an individualistic thesis (see
Sampson, 1975b). Denning equity within a
larger system of relationships has escaped the
attention of many social psychologists who
continue to search within the psychology of
the individual for his or her demands for
personal equity rather than within the group
or collectivity for less individualistic prin-
ciples.
Encounter, Sensitivity, and the
Growth-Group Movement
The growing and seemingly never-ending
developments within the sensitivity training,
or growth-group, movement seem likewise
heavily burdened with the self-contained in-
dividualistic thesis. The greatest good is in-
dividual self-expression; the group and the
culture are seen as the evils that thwart
freedom and independence. What has hap-
pened to the concept of interdependence in
such settings? Persons are helped to separate
themselves even further from others. Al-
though much of this work takes place within
a group context, it appears to be more a
case of parallel play than of real interde-
pendence. Too often, I have seen individuals
so wrapped up in themselves that they are
incapable of reaching out to others; they
evidence little interest in the goings on until
it is their turn. And this narcissistic focus is
reinforced 
by many who facilitate such
778
EDWARD E. SAMPSON
growth experiences. Growth has come to
mean individual growth at the expense of
the growth and recognition of interdepend-
ence.
Self-Contained Individualism:
A Further Note on History
I have raised questions in this paper about
some of our cherished psychological beliefs
and ideals. Few will actively applaud the
ideal of a self-contained individualist; many
will find it disturbing to tolerate placing an-
drogyny, mental health, and cognitive and
moral development within the purview of
this kind of analysis. I have contributed to
these areas in my own work; I find my own
analyses disturbing in their implications as
well. If I am casting the first stone, there-
fore, it is from a position of equal guilt and
complicity. Does my own work (e.g., ap-
plauding the qualities of the resisters and
bemoaning the qualities of the cadets) also
truly conform to an individualistic ideal that
I now find potentially destructive of human
welfare? As I have suggested in this article,
I think it does. But I could not let matters
rest there; I pondered the questions of why
and found some helpful understanding in the
analysis that the sociologist Nisbet (1966)
made concerning Max Weber. Let me first
spell that out and then connect it to the
theme of this paper.
Weber's analysis of bureaucracies (1947)
led him to focus on the concept he termed
rationalization. This is not the psychologist's
principle of justification and excuse-making,
but rather the dynamic force of the bureau-
cratic organization. To rationalize a human
activity is to abstract it and to impersonalize
it; rationalization eliminates the personal and
the unique from organizational practice. As
Nisbet notes, Weber was struck by the im-
portant and beneficial consequences that de-
rived from the creation of large bureaucracies
and their operational process of rationaliza-
tion. Both bureaucratization and rationaliza-
tion, like Fromm's 
concept of 
freedom
(1941), were "creative and liberating." But,
as Nisbet comments, their liberating quali-
ties were based on their being posed in oppo-
sition to the stifling structures of organiza-
tion that characterized the Middle Ages. In
other words, so long as rationalization and
bureaucratization were forces opposing ex-
cessively personalized, traditional, and famil-
ial forms of organization, the overall effect
was liberating for human welfare.
What happened, however, is captured elo-
quently by Nisbet:
With the gradual diminution and desiccation of this
structure . . . rationalization threatens now to be-
come, not creative and liberating, but mechanizing,
regimenting, and ultimately, reason-destroying. (Nis-
bet, 1966, p. 294)
One piece of the dialectic running its course
without opposition from the other soon be-
comes a threat in its own right.
Now, let us apply this same mode of
thinking to individualism. In the context of
the "overorganized and reason-destroying"
quality of collective life, individualism, self-
containment, freedom from the group, and
standing apart (or trying to) as a unique in-
dividual—all seem to be bold and liberating
gestures. Yet, even as overorganization and
rationalization can destroy reason when their
dialectical opponent is missing, excessive in-
dividualism and the pursuit of a self-con-
tained ideal likewise can destroy reason and
human life. Being a self-contained individual
—needing or wanting no one, avoiding inter-
dependence and contact with others so as to
secure one's own satisfaction—seems to be
good so long as it is held in opposition to
overdomination and submergence in the col-
lective. But that same force fails and is de-
structive when it becomes the guiding per-
spective.
We are experiencing individuals' efforts
to break free from those interdependencies
that have bound and constrained them. Our
psychological theories are responsive to this
cultural ideal. But this ideal has its moment
in time; we need to see it against the wider
backdrop of history. Our contemporary psy-
chological ideal is the person who fights
against interdependent collective activity;
this is as ill-equipped and ill-informed an
ideal as a psychological principle of the
Middle Ages that offers an ideal of the
PSYCHOLOGY AND THE AMERICAN IDEAL
779
"organization man or woman," a person who
has lost uniqueness and individuality and
has submitted to impersonal, rationalized
bureaucratic rule.
A self-contained ideal fails us at just that
moment when interdependence is necessary
both to solve our problems and to do so in
a democratic rather than autocratic manner.
Self-contained individualism can be governed
only at great cost to human welfare. Inter-
dependence, not self-sufficiency, holds out the
best hope for democratic processes of gov-
ernance and national problem solving. Is it
so paradoxical to note that only in recogni-
tion of our group belongingness and collec-
tive needs, rather than our independence
and self-sufficiency, can we be democratically
governed? The tragedy of the commons is a
tragedy for persons who pursue self-con-
tained individualism as their ideal. Such per-
sons require strong, autocratic governance to
control their appetites. Democratic problem
solving builds upon a sensitivity to collec-
tive interests and interdependence. Hogan
(1975) and Barker (1960) reached a similar
conclusion, though Barker's analysis came at
this issue from a different theoretical per-
spective.
Basically, my heroes and much of the
psychological ideal have been those resisters
and others (e.g., androgynous types, persons
of advanced "moral development") who have
been able to stand up in defiance of the
group or who have contained within them-
selves all the desirable qualities of their cul-
ture. While this is understandable in our
historical and cultural context, like rational-
ization and bureaucratization, the liberating
effects of such self-contained individualism
soon pale and become unliberating and rea-
son-destroying when they become the driving
force of history at a time when major social
issues demand interdependence.
Toward a Conclusion
I think that it is possible to outline several
consequences that derive from an individual-
istic as contrasted with a more interdepend-
ent focus:
1. A substantial burden of personal re-
sponsibility for success or failure is placed
on the individual within the individualistc
perspectve; responsibility is located within
the larger community in the interdependent
perspective. Basically, if individuals are sup-
posed to achieve within themselves a syn-
thesis of opposing characteristics or possess
all the desirable qualities of their culture,
then the burden is upon them to measure up
to this standard. The community is not the
responsible unit; society is not the respon-
sible unit; the burden falls squarely on the
shoulders of the individual. Is it any wonder
that failure or fear of failure wreaks its
havoc on so many? Is it any wonder that
persons shy away from competition or rush
headlong into it, trying to take everything
unto themselves? We stand by and cheer
their successes. Where are we when they
have failed?
2. As Caplan and Nelson noted (1973),
by placing so heavy a burden on the in-
dividual, we likewise place the burden for
resolving problems and inducing 
change
squarely in the hands of the individual. The
collectivity again is spared its complicity.
We search for the failing person, the evil
person, the disturbed personality and neglect
the larger network of persons within which
the "target" is located. Likewise, we con-
sider the person who requires a continuing
system of supportive, interdependent rela-
tions to be weak or not quite cured and re-
turned to health. Thus we fail to entertain
as a serious alternative the maintenance of
collectives that resolve crises, rather than
individuals who must carry the entire weight
individually.
3. Psychology plays an important role,
even more so as it has become the new pop-
ular ideology, religion, and justifier for a
variety of social programs. That role can
continue to serve an isolating, atomizing, in-
dividualizing, and alienating function, or it
can help refocus us on the fundamental in-
terdependencies that need nurturance as well.
We have examined the role that psycho-
logical thinking plays in confirming an in-
dividualistic, self-contained ideal. Excessive
individualism leads to alienation and es-
780
EDWARD E. SAMPSON
trangement; it isolates person from person;
it separates us from the very nutrient soil
out of which we were cast in the first place.
Interdependence is inbred early as we form
our basic attachments to parents and others;
yet we see the breakdown of those attach-
ments espoused as an ideal in the island-
like ethos of our contemporary culture.
We are not rushing headlong into a new,
exciting, and liberating age. Societal dis-
order reflects a basic inability to cope with
our interdependencies; persons avoid their
connections with others; avoid the basic
human bonds that are essential for human
survival and enhancement. Our psychologi-
cal theories must do more than reflect what
is, they must place what is in the context
of our existing ethos and then provide some
helpful, empirical guidelines regarding the
consequences of that ethos and alternative
possibilities.
In the present context, androgyny as self-
contained individualism and morality as in-
dependence or transcendence from collective
loyalties may be related to high self-esteem
and personal success. But in the long run,
how can a society manage its complex prob-
lems of energy and population policy and its
welfare programs, for example, while sup-
porting so individualistic an outlook? How
can human welfare be based on people's de-
tachment from others and their seeking to
be self-contained? How can a democratic
system of governance survive when collective
interests and recognition of vital interde-
pendencies are felt to be too constraining?
Will psychology be in the forefront of to-
morrow's problem solving or remain in the
backwater, a chronicler of today's troubles
and an ideological contributor to our cul-
tural breakdown?
Psychology plays an important role in re-
inforcing an individualistic, 
self-contained
perspective; it helps play down the impor-
tance of interdependent values. It locates
syntheses of opposing qualities within per-
sons rather than within interdependent sys-
tems and thereby "gives away" 
(Smith,
1973) an unattainable and I think undesir-
able model of ideal human behavior.
If collective solutions to problems are
necessary, what important role can psychol-
ogy have if its approaches are so heavily in-
dividualistic and even anticollectivist? The
value bias of the discipline thwarts effective
problem solving on anything other than a
purely individual level, and even there, more
problems seem to be created than resolved
(e.g., placing so heavy a burden on individ-
uals to contain everything within them-
selves).
What can be done? First, on the theo-
retical level, we need to reconceptualize our
subject matter, building on some of the
ideas proposed earlier by Lewin and Blumer
and Mead as well as the recent ideas sug-
gested by Pepitone and others. We must look
for dialectical processes and syntheses within
systems and not simply within persons taken
individually. We must focus as much of our
thinking on the interdependencies that tie us
as on the individuating qualities that sepa-
rate us. Our theories of personality must
deindividuate themselves; we must develop
conceptions of personality similar to that
proposed by Sullivan (1953), for example,
in which personality is located in the inter-
personal field and not packaged entirely
within the individual. Reconceptualizing in
this manner will run counter to the immedi-
ate historical thrust of our society, but I
suspect we will be early in line for a coming,
more collectivistic thrust.
Methodologically, we must begin to focus
our research and our observation techniques
on the level of interdependent systems; we
must seek ways to evaluate balance and
equilibrium within systems rather than within
the parts of the system. Lewin's and others'
early work on the interpersonal Zeigarnik
effect (e.g., Lewis, 1944; Lewis & Franklin,
1944), aspects of which have been followed
up by Hornstein and his associates (e.g.,
Hernstein, 1972), provides us with one im-
portant example.
Psychology does have a role to play. As
an active participant in that field, I hope
that our role will be directed towards human
welfare. In this article, I have suggested
some ways in which our present thinking
PSYCHOLOGY AND THE AMERICAN IDEAL
781
seems to run counter to this goal. Psychology
has been describing the American ideal, but
we have a larger task before us than that.
Reference Note
1. Sampson, E. E , Fisher, L., Angel, A., Mulman,
A, Si Sullins, C Two profiles • The draft resister
and the ROTC 
cadet. Unpublished report, Uni-
versity of California, Berkeley, 1969.
References
Bakan, D. The duality of human existence. Chicago:
Rand McNally, 1966.
Bales, R. F. Adaptive and integrative changes as
sources of strain in social systems In A P Hare,
E 
F 
Borgatta, & R. F. Bales (Eds), Small
groups: Studies in social interaction. New York.
Knopf, 19S5
Bales, R. F. Task roles and social roles in problem-
solving groups In E. E. Maccoby, T. M New-
comb, & E L Hartley (Eds), Readings in social
psychology 
(3rd ed.). New York: Holt, Rinehart
& Winston, 19S8.
Bar-HiUel, Y. Indexical expressions. Mind, 19S4, 63,
3S9-379.
Barker, R 
G. Ecology and motivation In M. R.
Jones (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motiva-
tion (Vol. 8). Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press, 1960.
Bern, S. L. The measurement of psychological an-
drogyny. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psy-
chology, 1974, 42, 155-162.
Bern, S. L Sex role adaptability: One consequence
of psychological androgyny 
Journal 
of Person-
ality and Soaal 
Psychology, 
1975, 31, 634-643
Bern, S. L., & Lenney, E Sex typing and the avoid-
ance of cross-sex behavior. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 1976, 33, 48-54.
Benedict, R. Patterns of the good culture. 
Psy-
chology Today, June 1970, pp. 53-55; 74-77.
Benne, K. D. The process of re-education: An
assessment of Kurt Lewin's views 
Groups and
Organizational Studies, 1976, 1, 26-42.
Block, J. H. Conceptions of sex role. Some cross-
cultural and longitudinal perspectives. 
American
Psychologist, 1973, 28, 512-526.
Blumer, H. Sociological implications of the thought
of George Herbert Mead. American Journal of
Sociology, 1966, 71, 535-544.
Bryan, J. H Why children help: A review. Journal
of Social Issues, 1972, 28, 87-104.
Campbell, D. T. On the conflicts between biological
and social evolution and between psychology and
moral tradition. American Psychologist, 
1975, 30,
UO3-1126.
Caplan, N., & Nelson, S. D. On being useful: The
nature and consequences of psychological research
on social problems. American Psychologist, 
1973,
28, 199-211.
Carlson, R 
Understanding 
women' 
Implications
for personality theory and research Journal of
Soaal Issues, 1972, 28, 17-32.
Deutsch, M. A theory of cooperation and competi-
tion Human Relations, 1949, 2, 129-152.
Fromm, E. Escape from freedom. New York: Holt,
Rinehart & Winston, 1941.
Garfinkel, H Ethnomethodology. 
Englewood Cliffs,
N J : Prentice-Hall, 1967.
Gergen, K. J. Social psychology as history. Journal
of Personality 
and Soaal Psychology, 
1973, 26,
309-320
Goldschmidt, W. Reply to Campbell. American 
Psy-
chologist, 1976, 31, 355-357.
Hardin, G. The tragedy of the commons. Science,
1968, 162, 1243-1248.
Hogan, R Theoretical egocentrism and the problem
of compliance American Psychologist, 
1975, 30,
533-540
Hogan, R. Reply to Campbell. American 
Psycholo-
gist, 1976, 31, 363-366.
Hornstein, H. S Promotive tension: The basis of
prosocial behavior. Journal of Social Issues, 1972,
28, 191-218
Jahoda, M Current conceptions of positive 
mental
health New York: Basic Books, 1958.
Kohlberg, L 
The child as a moral philosopher.
Psychology Today, September 1968, pp 
24-31.
Kohlberg, L 
Stage and sequence. The cognitive-
developmental approach to socialization In D. A.
Goshn (Ed.), Handbook 
of socialization 
theory
and research. Chicago: Rand McNally, 1969.
Lewin, K. Field theory in social science. New York:
Harper & Row, 1951
Lewin, K., & Grabbe, P. Conduct, knowledge and
acceptance of new values Journal of Social Issues,
1945,1, 56-64.
Lewis, H. B. An experimental study of the role of
the ego in work- I. The role of the ego in co-
operative work. Journal 
of Experimental 
Psy-
chology, 1944, 34, 113-126.
Lewis, H B , & Franklin, M An experimental study
of the role of the ego in work: II. The signifi-
cance of task orientation in work Journal of Ex-
perimental Psychology, 
1944, 31, 195-215
Mantell, D. M. True Americanism: Green berets and
war resisters. New York: Teachers College Press,
1974.
Mead, G. H. Mind, self and society. Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1934.
Nisbet, R. A. The sociological tradition. New York:
Basic Books, 1966
Pepitone, A Toward a normative and comparative
biocultural social psychology. Journal 
of 
Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 1976, 34, 641-653.
Platt, J. Social traps American Psychologist, 1973,
29, 641-651.
Riegel, K. F The dialectics of human development.
American Psychologist, 1976, 31, 689-700.
782
EDWARD E. SAMPSON
Rychlak, J. F A philosophy of science for person-
ality theory. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1968.
Sampson, E. E. Ego at the threshold. New York:
Delta Books, 1975. (a)
Sampson, E. E. On justice as equality. Journal of
Social Issues, 1975, 31, 45-64. (b)
Sampson, E. E. Social psychology and contemporary
society (2nd ed.). New York: Wiley, 1976.
Smith, M. B. Is psychology relevant to new pri-
orities? American Psychologist, 1973, 28, 463-
471.
Sobo, S. Narcissism and social disorder. Yale Re-
view, 1975, 64, 527-543.
Spence, J. T., Helmreich, R, & Stapp, J. Ratings
of self and peers on sex role attributes and their
relation to self-esteem and conceptions of mas-
culinity and femininity. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 1975, 32, 29-39.
Sullivan, H. S The interpersonal theory of psychi-
atry. New York- Norton, 1953.
Weber, M The theory of social and economic or-
ganization New York: Oxford University Press,
1947.
Wilson, T. P Conceptions of interaction and forms
of sociological explanation. American Sociological
Review, 1970, 35, 697-709.
Received June 13, 1977 •
Notice to Authors
This journal supports the idea that sexism in language is avoidable. 
Authors are
requested to refer to the "Guidelines for Nonsexist Language in APA Journals"
(Publication Manual Change Sheet 2, American Psychologist, June 1977, pp. 487-
494) before submitting manuscripts to this journal. 
Single copies of the Guidelines
are also available by writing to Publication Manual Change Sheet 2, American
Psychological Association, 1200 Seventeenth Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20036.
