The Psychological Measurement of 
Cultural Syndromes 
Harry C. Triandis 
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
An examination of a range of definitions of culture indi- 
cates that almost all researchers agree that culture is re- 
flected in shared cognitions, standard operating proce- 
dures, and unexamined assumptions. Cultural syndromes 
consist of shared attitudes, beliefs, norms, role and self 
definitions, and values of members of each culture that 
are organized around a theme. Two methods of measure- 
ment of syndromes that allow the examination of the con- 
vergence of the data from each method in each culture are 
(a) the identification of questionnaire items to which an 
arbitrary 90% of each sample responds on the same side 
of the neutral point and (b) the identification of items to 
which an arbitrary 90% of triads--consisting of members 
of each culture--agree among themselves in fewer than 
60 seconds on the appropriate response to the item. The 
shorter the time to reach agreement, the more likely it is 
that the item is an element of culture. Examples of these 
approaches are presented, and discussion focuses on how 
to obtain good descriptions of cultures through psycho- 
logical methods. 
Almost 
all the theories 
data 
contemporary 
and 
of 
psychology come from Western populations (e.g., 
Europeans, North Americans, Australians, etc.). 
Yet about 70% of humans live in non-Western cultures 
(Triandis, 1995). If psychology is to become a universal 
discipline it will need both theories and data from the 
majority of humans. In recent years, psychologists who 
were raised in non-Western traditions such as Hui, Kim, 
Kitayama, Leung, Setiadi, and others (see Triandis, 1995, 
for references to their work) have supplied such data. 
Their work has suggested that each culture may have, at 
least to some extent, its own psychology. These indigenous 
psychologies (Kim & Berry, 1993) are both similar and 
different from contemporary psychology. Contemporary 
psychology is best conceived as a Western indigenous 
psychology that is a special case of the universal psy- 
chology we as contemporary psychologists would like to 
develop. When the indigenous psychologies are incor- 
porated into a universal framework, we will have a uni- 
versal psychology. 
To bridge the gap between contemporary psychology 
and many of the indigenous psychologies, we need con- 
structs that will indicate how a phenomenon found in 
contemporary psychology is modified in indigenous psy- 
chologies. This article proposes that cultural syndromes 
(Triandis, 1993, 1995) are such constructs. Cultural syn- 
dromes are conceived as dimensions of cultural variation 
that can be used as parameters of psychological theories. 
That is, if a population is high on a given dimension of 
cultural variation, the theory will take one form; if the 
population is low on that dimension, the theory might 
take a somewhat different form (e.g., Kitayama, Markus, 
& Lieberman, 1995; Kitayama, Markus, & Matsumoto, 
1995). In that way, the current psychological theories will 
become special cases of the universal theories. 
The first step toward the development of dimensions 
of cultural variations is the identification of cultural syn- 
dromes (Triandis, 1993, 1995). This article discusses how 
psychological methods can be applied to study such 
syndromes. 
The importance of the identification of theories ap- 
propriate for non-Western cultures becomes clearer when 
we realize that all humans are ethnocentric (Triandis, 
1994, in press) and suffer from naive realism that limits 
the full appreciation of"the subjective status of their own 
construals, and, as such, they do not make sufficient al- 
lowances for the uncertainties of construal when called 
on to make behavioral attributions and predictions about 
others" (Robinson, Keltner, Ward, & Ross, 1995, p. 404). 
We psychologists often use unexamined assumptions 
found in our own culture when constructing theories 
(Ichheiser, 1949, 1970), so that our theories often reflect 
our culture. This is much more the case in clinical, social, 
and personality psychology than in animal, experimental, 
or physiological psychology, but the extent of shaping of 
psychological theories by unstated assumptions found in 
our culture is unknown. 
The tendency to use constructs from Western culture 
to construct psychological theories while believing that 
we are constructing universal theories is also aggravated 
by the phenomenon of false consensus (Mullen et al., 
Editor's note. Articles based on APA award addresses are given special 
consideration in the American Psychologist's editorial selection process. 
A version of this article was originally presented as part of a Dis- 
tinguished Contributions to the International Advancement of Psychology 
Award address at the 103rd Annual Convention of the American Psy- 
chological Association, New York, NY, August 1995. 
Author's note. Correspondence concerning this article should 
be addressed to Harry C. Triandis, Department of Psychology, 
University of Illinois, 603 East Daniel Street, Champaign, 
IL 61820. Electronic mail be may sent via Internet to 
H Triandi@s.psych.uiuc.edu. 
April 1996 
• American Psychologist 
Copyright 1996 by the American Psychological Association, Inc. 0003-066X/96/$2.00 
Vol. 51, No. 4, 407--415 
407 
1985). People who agree with a position believe that a 
large percentage of humans agrees with that position; 
people who disagree with a position believe that a very 
small percentage of humans agrees with the position. The 
effect is strong (Mullen et al. report effect sizes of .3 to 
1.3) and extraordinarily statistically significant (p < 
.0000000001); several attempts to eliminate it have 
proved ineffective (Krueger & Clement, 1994). 
In short, people tend to believe that the way they see 
the world is the way most people see the world. Therefore, 
they tend to see their psychological theories as universal. 
To control this tendency, we as psychologists need objec- 
tive data that tell us how people from other cultures see 
the world. Such data often show that our theories need 
to be modified when they are applied to non-Western 
populations. For example, our theories tend to emphasize 
the importance of attitudes, beliefs, needs, personality, 
and idiosyncratic values because Western culture is in- 
dividualistic and Western psychology focuses on individ- 
uals and processes internal to individuals. However, in 
non-Western cultures norms, collective needs, collective 
self-definitions, and values are often more important. Ex- 
ternal processes, such as the membership of the individual 
in a collective (i.e., family, village, work group, religious 
community, or nation) and the context of behavior, are 
emphasized. 
The weights we give to specific variables in predicting 
psychological phenomena shift with the context, and cul- 
ture is one of the most important contexts. To put it dif- 
ferently, the psychology of the individualistic cultures of 
the West differs to some extent from the psychology of 
the collectivist cultures of the East and the traditional 
cultures of Africa and Latin America (Triandis, 1988, 
1989, 1990, 1994, 1995; Triandis, Brislin, & Hui, 1988; 
Triandis, McCusker, & Hui, 1990; Triandis, Bontempo, 
Villareal, Asai, & Lucca, 1988). Thus, cross-cultural psy- 
chology offers a means for the development of a universal 
psychology (Triandis, in press). 
Definition of Culture 
The definition of culture has been controversial in the 
social sciences. Cultural anthropologists have defined it 
in more than one hundred ways (Kroeber & Kluckhohn, 
1952). It has been defined as the human-made part of 
the environment (Herskovits, 1955), and thus it can be 
distinguished into objective culture (e.g., tools or roads) 
and subjective culture (e.g., categorizations, beliefs, at- 
titudes, norms, role definitions, or values; Triandis, 1972). 
It has been defined also as a complex schedule of rein- 
forcements (Skinner, 198 I), as being to humans what a 
program is to a computer (Hofstede, 1991). Some have 
emphasized shared behaviors (Goodenough, 1970), and 
others emphasized shared cognitive systems (Gooden- 
ough, 1971/1981) or meanings (Pelto & Pelto, 1975; 
Shweder & LeVine, 1984). Some have emphasized shared 
symbolic systems (Geertz, 1973; Schneider, 1968). Kees- 
ing (1981) defined it as a system of competencies shared 
by a group of people. Some have mentioned shared cog- 
nitive maps (Murdock, 1945), but others have argued that 
it is a construct only in the mind of the investigator (Spiro, 
1951). Other definitions have stressed that culture is to 
society what memory is to individuals (Kluckhohn, 1954) 
and have viewed it as consisting of shared elements of 
subjective culture and behavioral patterns found among 
those who speak a particular language dialect, in a par- 
ticular geographic region, during a specific historic period 
(Triandis, 1994). 
Thus, although there are many definitions, there is 
wide agreement that culture consists of shared elements 
(Shweder & LeVine, 1984) that provide the standards for 
perceiving, believing, evaluating, communicating, and 
acting among those who share a language, a historic pe- 
riod, and a geographic location. The shared elements are 
transmitted from generation to generation with modifi- 
cations. They include unexamined assumptions and 
standard operating procedures that reflect "what has 
worked" at one point in the history of a cultural group. 
The study of cultural differences aims, in part, to 
identify cultural regions within which cultures are more 
or less alike. In general, geography is an important way 
to identify such regions. For example, the West, consisting 
of Europe and North America, and the East, consisting 
of the cultures of East Asia, can be seen as different 
regions. 
Different disciplines have used different methods of 
identifying cultural regions. For example, leading an- 
thropologists (Burton, Moore, Whiting, & Romney, in 
press) have paid much attention to social structure. In a 
multidimensional scaling of social structural data from 
35 t cultures, these researchers identified 10 regions. What 
is striking about this work is that Europeans, Koreans, 
Japanese, and Polar Eskimos end up in the same region, 
whereas Native Americans are so diverse that they require 
five regions. In any case, if Europeans and East Asians 
have similar social structures, it must be that the social 
structure criterion is insufficient to provide discrimina- 
tions among cultures that are obviously rather different. 
Thus, a psychological method of analysis might be used 
to augment the sensitivity of these discriminations and 
develop a clearer understanding of cultural differences. 
One way of doing this analysis is to use well-established 
psychological constructs, which leads to the use of cultural 
syndromes. 
A cultural syndrome is a pattern of shared attitudes, 
beliefs, categorizations, self-definitions, norms, role def- 
initions, and values that is organized around a theme that 
can be identified among those who speak a particular 
language, during a specific historic period, and in a de- 
finable geographic region (Triandis, 1993, 1994, t995). 
Examples of such syndromes are 
Tightness: In some cultures, there are very many norms 
that apply across many situations. Minor deviations from 
norms are criticized and punished; in other cultures, there 
are few norms, and only major deviations from norms 
are criticized (Triandis, 1994). Tightness is highly situa- 
tional; for example, the United States is, at this time, 
rather loose in marital arrangements but tight in banking 
408 
April 1996 • American Psychologist 
regulations. However, across situations, Japan is tighter 
overall than the U.S. because there are many more rules 
concerning many more situations, and people are ex- 
tremely concerned that they not break them (Iwao, 1993). 
Cultural Complexity: The number of different cultural 
elements, such as role definitions, can be large or small 
(e.g., about 20 jobs among hunters and gatherers vs. 
250,000 types of jobs in information societies). Cultural 
complexity is higher when the size of settlements is large 
(e.g., Mexico City with about 20 million people vs. a vil- 
lage with 200 people). Also, cultures differ in the com- 
plexity and multiplicity of religious, economic, political, 
educational, social, and aesthetic standards. 
Active-Passive: This syndrome, first described by Diaz- 
Guerrero (1967), includes a number of active (e.g., com- 
petition, action, and self-fulfillment) and passive (e.g., re- 
flective thought, leave the initiative to others, and coop- 
eration) elements. 
Honor: This pattern is a rather narrow syndrome, focused 
on the concept of honor. It emerges in environments in 
which property is mobile and to protect it individuals 
have to appear fierce so that outsiders will not dare to try 
to take it from them. It includes beliefs, attitudes, norms, 
values, and behaviors (e.g., hypersensitivity to affronts) 
that favor the use of aggression for self-protection, to de- 
fend one's honor, and to socialize children so that they 
will react when challenged (Cohen & Nisbett, 1994). 
Collectivism: In some cultures the self is defined as an 
aspect of a collective (e.g., family or tribe); personal goals 
are subordinated to the goals of this collective; norms, 
duties, and obligations regulate most social behavior; 
taking into account the needs of others in the regulation 
of social behavior is widely practiced. Traditional cultures 
and many of the cultures of Asia and Africa include many 
collectivist elements. 
Individualism: The self is defined as independent and au- 
tonomous from collectives. Personal goals are given 
priority over the goals of collectives. Social behavior is 
shaped by attitudes and perceived enjoyable conse- 
quences. The perceived profit and loss from a social be- 
havior is computed, and when a relationship is too costly 
it is dropped. Western Europe and North America are 
high on this syndrome (Hui & Triandis, 1986; Triandis, 
1990; Triandis et al., 1986, 1988; Triandis, Leung, Vil- 
lareal, & Clack, 1985). This construct has a long history 
in philosophy and the social sciences (Dumont, 1983; 
Kim, Triandis, Kagit~ibasi, Choi, & Yoon, 1994; Triandis, 
1995) and is linked to the ideology of modernity. 
Vertical and Horizontal Relationships: In some cultures 
hierarchy is very important, and ingroup authorities de- 
termine most social behavior. In other cultures social be- 
havior is more egalitarian. 
In these examples the importance of norms, com- 
plexity, action, honor, collectives, and individuals is the 
organizing theme of each of the syndromes. 
Number of Cultural Syndromes 
The number of syndromes for an adequate description 
of cultural differences is at this time unknown. It is hoped 
that a dozen or a score of syndromes, to be identified in 
the future, will account for most of the interesting, reliable 
cultural differences. There is also the problem that syn- 
dromes are somewhat related to each other. For example, 
tight, passive, simple cultures are likely to be more col- 
lectivist; loose, active, complex cultures are likely to be 
more individualistic. The higher these correlations, the 
less does any one syndrome provide independent infor- 
mation about cultural differences. 
Collectivism and Individualism as Polythetic 
Constructs 
Triandis (1995) suggested that four attributes define col- 
lectivism and individualism: 
• The meaning of the self. Collectivists cut up the 
social space by using groups as the units of anal- 
ysis; individualists use individuals for that purpose. 
The definition of the self in collectivist cultures is 
interdependent with members of groups (Markus 
& Kitayama, 1991); in individualist cultures it is 
autonomous and independent of groups (Rey- 
kowski, 1994). Interdependence is theoretically 
distinct from social identity (Markus & Kitayama, 
1994, p. 570). 
• The structure of goals. Collectivists use individual 
goals that are compatible with the goals of their 
ingroups. If there is a discrepancy between the 
two sets of goals, collectivists give priority to the 
ingroup goals. Individualists use individual goals 
that may or may not be compatible with the goals 
of their ingroups. If there is a discrepancy between 
the two sets of goals, individualists give priority 
to their personal goals (Schwartz, 1990, 1992, 
1994; Triandis, 1988, 1990). 
• Behavior is a function of norms and attitudes. 
Across a wide range of situations, collectivists give 
more weight to norms than to attitudes as deter- 
minants of their social behavior; individualists give 
more weight to attitudes than to norms as deter- 
minants of social behavior (Bontempo & Rivero, 
1992; Davidson, Jaccard, Triandis, Morales, & 
Diaz-Guerrero, 1976; Miller, 1994). 
• Focus on the needs of the ingroup or social ex- 
changes. Collectivists pay much attention to the 
needs of members of their ingroups in determining 
their social behavior. Thus, if a relationship is de- 
sirable from the point of view of the ingroup but 
costly from the point of view of the individual, 
the individual is likely to stay in the relationship. 
Individualists pay attention to the advantages and 
costs of relationships, as described by exchange 
theory (Thibaut & Kelley, 1959). If the costs ex- 
ceed the advantages, individualists drop the rela- 
tionship. As a result, generally across situations, 
collectivists engage in communal relationships, 
April 1996 • American Psychologist 
409 
whereas individualists engage in exchange rela- 
tionships (Mills & Clark, 1982). 
In addition to these four attributes, Triandis (1995) 
has identified some 60 other attributes that are sometimes 
found in a collectivist or individualist culture. Current 
research keeps adding findings that distinguish individ- 
ualist and collectivist cultures. For example, individualists 
are higher than collectivists in self-esteem and self-efficacy, 
and use internal states (e.g., emotions) as means of ap- 
praising situations, whereas collectivists use inputs from 
ingroups to appraise situations (Oettingen, 1995; Oettin- 
gen, Little, Lindenberger, & Baltes, 1994). Whereas in- 
dividualists explicitly enhance their self-esteem, collec- 
tivists do so implicitly (Kitayama & Karasawa, 1995). 
The collectivism and individualism constructs 
should be defined polythetically. In zoology, a few attri- 
butes (e.g., feathers or wings) are used to define a "bird," 
and many additional features are used to define hundreds 
of species of birds. Similarly, in the case of cultures we 
can use the above-mentioned four attributes to decide 
whether a culture is on the whole collectivist or individ- 
ualist. Then we can use the 60 additional attributes to 
decide what species of collectivism or individualism is 
found in that culture. 
For example, in Eastern collectivist cultures it is very 
important to maintain harmony within the ingroup 
(Bond, 1994). However, in the Israeli kibbutz this is not 
emphasized. In fact, strong intellectual arguments are 
welcomed and enjoyed in that species of collectivism. 
Vertical and Horizontal Varieties of 
Collectivism and Individualism 
Triandis (1995) suggested that the two most important 
species of individualism and collectivism are the hori- 
zontal and vertical ones. There is evidence that we as 
researchers can distinguish vertical and horizontal indi- 
vidualist and collectivist cultures. One of the ways to do 
that is to use the values of the subjects. 
In a large project, one that tested 200 teachers and 
200 students (or representative samples of the culture) in 
almost 50 countries, the participants rated 56 values on 
nine-point 
scales, 
according to 
their importance 
(Schwartz, 1992, 1994). It was found through smallest 
space analysis (a form of multidimensional scaling) that 
in most cultures the values formed approximately the 
same pattern. One axis was Collectivism versus Individ- 
ualism. The Collectivist side included Conformity and 
Security and other collectivist values, which are especially 
high in East Asian countries, in traditional societies, and 
in the former communist countries. The Individualist side 
included cultures that emphasized Self-Direction and 
Hedonism as well as other individualistic values that are 
high in Western cultures. 
The second axis was vertical (Power and Achieve- 
ment) versus horizontal (Benevolence and Universalism). 
If we add Benevolence to the collectivist values, we have 
Horizontal Collectivism. If we add Universalism (this 
pattern includes "equality") to the individualist values, 
we have Horizontal Individualism. If we add Power to 
the collectivist values, we have Vertical Collectivism. If 
we add Achievement to the Individualist values, we have 
Vertical Individualism. 
Rokeach (1973) also studied values, and argued that 
political systems can be characterized by the extent people 
rank "freedom" and "equality" either high or low. Ro- 
keach used content analyses of the speeches of political 
leaders that indicated that they used the words "freedom" 
and "equality" with very different frequencies. For in- 
stance, communist leaders such as Lenin mentioned 
equality frequently and freedom rarely; social democrats 
mentioned both freedom and equality with high fre- 
quencies; fascists mentioned neither; leaders in Western 
democracies mentioned freedom very frequently, and 
equality infrequently. 
In a study of managerial values in 43 nations, Smith, 
Dugan, and Trompenaars (in press) identified two inde- 
pendent dimensions that parallel the horizontal-vertical/ 
individualism-collectivism typology. 
The pattern of Horizontal and Vertical Individualism 
and Collectivism can also be seen in the social orientations 
identified by Fiske (1990, 1992). What Fiske called com- 
munal sharing has much in common with Collectivism; 
authority ranking with Vertical social relationships; 
equality matching with Horizontal relationships; and 
market pricing with Individualism. 
Integrating the work on the self (Markus & Kita- 
yama, 1991), which can be interdependent or indepen- 
dent, with the idea of a "same" self or a "different" self, 
Triandis (1995) presented the attributes of Vertical and 
Horizontal Collectivism and Individualism, as shown in 
Appendix A. 
Traditional societies tend to be Vertical Collectivist. 
For example, in India differences in status (reflected in 
the caste system) but also strong obligations to the family 
and the caste create a Vertically Collectivist culture. In 
cultures in which competition for distinctiveness is high, 
as in the U.S. where it is a great compliment to say that 
someone is "distinguished," there is Vertical Individu- 
alism. Consistent with Vertical Individualism, middle- 
and upper-class Americans are offended if an experi- 
menter suggests to them that they are "average" (Weldon, 
1984; Markus & Kitayama, 1991). 
Americans often emphasize equality (Horizontal 
Individualism), but they also tolerate inequality (e.g., ra- 
cial or social class) better than do Swedes, who are willing 
to be taxed at high rates so that income inequality can 
be reduced. For example, if we consider the ratio of the 
income of the top 20% of the country's income distri- 
bution to the bottom 20% of the income distribution, we 
find that the U.S. has now a ratio of 9.0. In 1970 this 
ratio was 7.0, so recent years have increased inequality 
(i.e., made the society more vertical). France and the 
United Kingdom now have ratios of 7.0. However, in 
Sweden this ratio is 3.0 (both in 1970 and 1993); in Japan 
it is now 5.0, from a 1970 ratio of 4.0; in the Netherlands 
it is now 5.5 from about 5.0 in 1970. Thus, in most so- 
410 
April 1996 • American Psychologist 
cieties the trend is toward higher ratios (United Nations, 
1994). 
Incidentally, this ratio is very high in some societies 
(e.g., Brazil), and the frequency of criminal acts in large 
cities appears correlated with this ratio. Presumably, the 
larger this ratio the more those at the bottom feel hostile 
to those at the top and are willing to do something to 
restore the "balance of income" by taking resources from 
those who are better off than they are. 
Swedes (Daun, 1991, 1996) are individualistic, but 
they also tend to be horizontal. They do not want to be 
distinguished. For example, in one study the desire for 
high status was expressed by only 2% of the Swedish sam- 
ple, 7% of the American sample, and 25% of the German 
sample. Australians are also individualistic, but they tend 
to want to bring down "tall poppies" (Feather, 1994), 
suggesting that they are horizontal. 
Measurements of Individualism and 
Collectivism 
The self can be studied in many ways. For example, 
Triandis, McCusker, and Hui (1990) asked participants 
to complete 20 statements that began with the words "I 
am .... 
" Content analyses of their responses indicated 
that in collectivist cultures, the self has more social con- 
tent (averages between 30% and 50% in different samples) 
than in individualistic cultures (averages of 6% to 30% in 
different samples; the mode of 509 University of Illinois 
students was zero!). Especially interesting is the study by 
Altrocchi and Altrocchi (1995), which showed that the 
social content of the self of unacculturated Cook islanders 
averaged in the 27% to 58% range for different samples; 
for those Cook islanders who were acculturated to New 
Zealand, it averaged in the 20% to 31% range. 
A more detailed content analysis presented by Rhee, 
Uleman, Lee, and Roman (1995) used nine rather than 
just two categories for the spontaneous responses of Ko- 
rean and American participants to the aforementioned 
20 statements test. The category "pure traits" is especially 
interesting. Of course, it is a nonsocial response. European 
Americans gave this response 29% of the time; Koreans 
gave it only 12% of the time. Rhee et al. also classified 
Asian Americans according to whether they had identified 
their ethnicity (e.g., "I am Asian" or "I am Chinese"). 
Those Asian Americans who did not use ethnic responses 
were assumed to be assimilated to American society. They 
averaged 39% pure trait responses (i.e., they overshot the 
American norm). Those who gave an ethnic response only 
once were assumed to be integrated into American so- 
ciety. They averaged 25% pure trait responses. Those who 
gave two ethnic responses were assumed to be less ac- 
culturated; they averaged 17% pure trait responses. In 
other words, the predictions of the way acculturation will 
affect the responses to the 20-statement self-descriptions 
test were fully supported by their data. 
Trafimow, Triandis, and Goto (1991) randomly as- 
signed participants to two conditions in the laboratory 
that were designed to prime their collectivism or individ- 
ualism. The collectivist condition used the instruction 
"think of what you have in common with your family 
and friends." The individualist condition used the in- 
struction "think of what makes you different from your 
family and friends." These instructions resulted in sta- 
tistically different social content of the self in the expected 
direction. Furthermore, the social content of the sentence 
completions of introductory psychology students with 
Chinese names was significantly higher than the social 
content of the students with European names. 
It is possible to identify attitude items that measure 
horizontal-vertical, collectivism-individualism (Singelis, 
Triandis, Bhawuk, & Gelfand, 1995). A sample of such 
items is presented in Appendix B. 
In all cultures, individuals are capable of using all 
four patterns of responding. In some situations (e.g., when 
the ingroup is under attack from outsiders, and there are 
respected ingroup leaders) people use a vertical collectivist 
pattern in all cultures. However, the use of a particular 
pattern is likely to be culture-specific. Thus, in a specific 
culture, in some situations, people will be vertical collec- 
tivists (VC), in others, vertical individualists (VI); in some 
situations people may be horizontal collectivists (HC), and 
in others, horizontal individualists (HI). 
One way to think of an individual's personality is to 
construct a profile of these tendencies. For example, an 
individual might have a profile such as this one: VC 10% 
of the time, across situations; 30% VI; 5% HC; and 55% 
HI. Suppose we look at the distributions of these scores 
across a sample of individuals that is representative of a 
culture. By paying attention to the modal values on each 
of the four dimensions, we can characterize the culture 
as being primarily VI, VC, HI, or HC. In most societies, 
the four themes coexist (e.g., in India, the vertical collec- 
tivist theme of family interdependence and obligations 
coexists with the HI theme of renouncing society and 
living alone as a holyman; Dumont, 1983). Individuals 
may select these themes at different times and in different 
situations, though there is a modal pattern that is selected 
most frequently. 
If we are to describe a culture adequately we need 
to take seriously the fact that, by definition, culture con- 
sists of shared elements. We can do that in at least two 
ways: 
1. We can examine the response distributions to 
items that measure elements of subjective culture. For 
example, in the case of attitude items, such as those of 
Appendix B, in one study we started with 80 items that 
reflected vertical and horizontal individualism and col- 
lectivism. We defined a cultural item as an item to which 
90% of the participants gave an answer (on a 9-point 
agree--disagree scale) on the same side of the neutral point. 
Our sample consisted of Illinois undergraduates. We 
found that 61% of the items that met this criterion hap- 
pened to be HI items; 5% were VI; 24% were HC, and 
10% were VC items. Thus this sample is predominantly 
horizontal (85%) and individualist (66%). 
One can also use scenarios, such as those of Appen- 
dix C. We used 36 such scenarios with a sample of Illinois 
undergraduates. For these scenarios, we used the criterion 
April 1996 • American Psychologist 
411 
that if at least 50% of the sample selected one of the four 
answers, it constituted a cultural response. We found that 
in the case of 65% of the scenarios that reached this cri- 
terion, the HI response had been selected. In the case of 
25% of the "cultural" scenarios, the HC response had 
been selected. All of the remaining 10% of the scenarios 
showed that the VI response had been selected. Thus, 
there is consistency in the way the attitude items and the 
scenarios were answered. The cultural responses of Illinois 
undergraduates are HI (61% to 65% of the time) and HC 
(24% to 25% of the time). 
2. One can also assemble 40 or so triads of members 
of a culture and present subjective culture items to them 
and ask them to respond as quickly as possible on whether 
they, as a group, agreed that the idea is important or 
unimportant. 
This study was done in Hong Kong and the United 
States (Triandis, Bontempo, Leung, & Hui, 1990). We 
used, in this case, a cutoff of one minute and an arbitrary 
agreement level of 85% of the triads. That is, if the triads 
agreed that a particular value was important in less than 
one minute and 85% of the triads reached agreement, we 
considered the item "cultural." For example, "persis- 
tence" is a very clear value in Hong Kong, wherein 100% 
of the triads agreed that it was important, with an average 
time of 2.7 seconds. In Illinois, this value did not reach 
criterion. "Self-actualization" was considered important 
by 96% of the Illinois triads, with an average time of 4.3 
seconds; it did not reach criterion in Hong Kong. Thus 
it is a value in Illinois but not in Hong Kong. "To be well 
adjusted" was a value in both cultures. 
These two examples suggest how we can use psy- 
chological methods to study cultural syndromes. We need 
to identify items that measure each of the elements of 
the cultural syndromes such as beliefs, attitudes, norms, 
role and self-definitions, and values. We can examine the 
response distributions to each of these elements and select 
items that meet the 90% agreement criterion. We can 
also assemble triads of individuals and ask them to re- 
spond to elements of subjective culture. Timing their re- 
sponses and degrees of agreement can indicate which of 
the elements are "cultural." We can do such studies, not 
only in different cultures but also across gender, social 
class, and other demographics. In some cases, the de- 
mographic breakdowns may turn out to be more impor- 
tant than the cultural. 
Discussion 
In this article, I suggested how we might study cultural 
syndromes through psychological methods. One might 
be curious to know if the cultural syndromes I described 
are in any way related to each other. In Triandis (1994), 
I speculated that they are. Specifically, I suggested that 
tight-simple cultures are most collectivist, and loose- 
complex cultures most individualistic. 
I suggested also that when a culture is homogeneous 
it is possible to have clear norms and impose them tightly; 
when the culture is heterogeneous, as is typical in mul- 
ticultural settings, looseness is necessary to avoid friction. 
When members of a culture must be interdependent to 
survive, as happens in many agricultural societies wherein 
irrigation canals require common actions, norms will be 
clear and imposed; when people live separated by large 
distances, they can tolerate deviations from norms. In 
complex cultures people have many choices; in poor, 
simple ones there are few choices. 
Collectivism is maximal when a society is low in 
complexity and tight; individualism is maximal when a 
society is complex and loose. Thus, individualism is high 
in affluent societies, in which individuals can decide 
without consultation with ingroup members about how 
to use their resources. Collectivism is high in societies in 
which collectives decide how to dispense resources. Note, 
however, that collectivism requires that the ingroup have 
resources to dispense. In very poor societies such as the 
Ik (Turnbull, 1972), or in the Brazilian favelas (Scheper- 
Hughes, 1985), the ingroup has no resources to dis- 
pense--we find in such societies intensive individualism. 
Several additional factors probably contribute to collec- 
tivism such as joint ownership of resources, schooling 
that glorifies the ingroup, large families, stability of res- 
idence, and isolation from outside influences. Several 
factors contribute to individualism such as high social 
class, migration, social mobility, and exposure to the mass 
media. 
As we develop measurements of tightness (now in 
progress), affluence (Gross National Product per capita) 
and individualism-collectivism (e.g., Singelis et al., 1995), 
we should be able to test these speculations. 
Conclusions 
Starting with the definition of culture, we have identified 
several psychological methods that can be used to char- 
acterize a culture. This work is at the cultural level and 
uses methods and approaches that are not usually used 
by psychologists. 
We can also use data from the individual level (i.e., 
individual differences information). By doing this, we 
identified individuals who are allocentric or idiocentric 
(Triandis et al., 1985). These personality attributes cor- 
respond to collectivism and individualism. The cultural 
and individual difference analyses are complementary and 
allow us to describe cultures and also identify individuals 
who are countercultural (e.g., allocentrics in an individ- 
ualistic culture who join communes and gangs, or idi- 
ocentric in a collectivist culture who feel oppressed by 
the culture and usually leave it if they are allowed to 
do so). 
The study of cultural syndromes can provide theory 
and method for the development of a universal psychology. 
Contemporary psychology can be seen as a special case 
of the to-be-developed universal psychology, and cultural 
syndromes may become the parameters of this universal 
psychology. 
REFERENCES 
Altrocchi, J., & Altrocchi, L. (1995). Polyfaceted psychological accul- 
turation in Cook islanders. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology. 26. 
426-440. 
412 
April 1996 • American Psychologist 
Bond, M. H. (1994). Continuing encounters with Hong Kong. In W. J. 
Lonner & R. Malpass (Eds.), Psychology and culture (pp. 239-244). 
Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 
Bontempo, R., & Rivero, J. C. (1992, August). Cultural variation in 
cognition. The role of self-concept in the attitude behavior link. Paper 
presented at the meetings of the American Academy of Management, 
Las Vegas, Nevada. 
Burton, M. L., Moore, C. C., Whiting, J. W. M., & Romney, A. K. (in 
press). Regions based on social structure. Current Anthropology. 
Cohen, D., & Nisbett, R. E. (1994). Self-protection and the culture of 
honor: Explaining Southern violence. Personality and Social Psy- 
chology Bulletin, 20. 551-567. 
Daun, A. ( 199 l). Individualism and collectivity among Swedes. Ethnos, 
56, 165-172. 
Daun, A. (1996). Swedish mentality, University Park: The Pennsylvania 
State University Press. 
Davidson, A. R., Jaccard, J. J., Triandis, H. C., Morales, M. L., & Diaz- 
Guerrero, R. (1976). Cross-cultural model testing: Toward a solution 
of the etic-emic dilemma. International Journal of Psychology, 11, 
1-13. 
Diaz-Guerrero, R. (1967). The active and passive syndromes. Revista 
Interamericana de Psicologia, 1, 263-272. 
Dumont, L. (1983). Essais sur l'individualism [Essays on individualism]. 
Paris: Editions du Seuil. 
Feather, N. T. (1994). Attitudes toward high achievers and reactions to 
their fall: Theory and research concerning tall poppies. In M. Zanna 
(Ed.), Advances in experimental socialpsychology (Vol. 25, pp. 1-73). 
New York: Academic Press. 
Fiske, A. (1990). Structures of social life: The four elementary forms of 
human relations. New York: Free Press. 
Fiske, A. P. (1992). The four elementary forms of sociality: Framework 
for a unified theory of social relations. Psychological Review, 99, 689- 
723. 
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures. New York: Basic Books. 
Goodenough, W. H. (1970). Description and comparison in cultural an- 
thropology Chicago: Aldine. 
Goodenough, W. H. (1981). Culture, language, and society (2nd ed.). 
Melno Park, CA: Benjamin/Cummings (First published in 1971). 
Herskovits, M. J. (1955). Cultural anthropology. New York: Knopf. 
Hofstede, G. ( 1991 ). Culture and organizations. London: McGraw-Hill. 
Hui, C. H., & Triandis, H. C. (1986). Individualism and collectivism: 
A study of cross-cultural researchers. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psy- 
chology, 17, 225-248. 
Ichheiser, G. (1949). Misunderstandings in human relations. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Ichheiser, G. (1970). Appearance & reality. San Francisco: Josse-Bass. 
Iwao, S. (1993). The Japanese woman: Traditional image and changing 
reality, New York: Free Press. 
Keesing, R. M. (1981). Theories of culture. In R. W. Casson (Ed.), Lan- 
guage, culture and cognition: Anthropological perspectives (pp. 42- 
66). New York: Macmillan. 
Kim, U., & Berry, J. W. (1993). Indigenous psychologies. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Kim, U., Triandis, H. C., Kagit~ibasi, C., Choi, S-C., & Yoon, G. (1994). 
Introduction. In Kim et al. (Eds.), Individualism and collectivism: 
Theory, method, and applications (pp. 1-19). Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage. 
Kitayama, S., & Karasawa, M. (1995, August). Implicit self-esteem in 
Japan: Name letters and birthday numbers. Paper presented to the 
meetings of the American Psychological Association, New York. 
Kitayama, S., Markus, H. R., & Lieberman, C. (1995). The collective 
construction of self esteem. In J. A. Russell, J. M. Fernandez-Dois, 
A. S. Manstead, & J. C. Wellkamp (Eds.), Everyday conceptions of 
emotion: An introduction to the psychology, anthropology, and lin- 
guistics of emotion (pp. 523-549). Kyoto: Japan Khiwer Academic 
Publishers. 
Kitayama, S., Markus, H. R., & Matsumoto, H. (1995). Culture, self, 
and emotion: A cultural perspective on "self-conscious" emotions. In 
J. P. Tangney & K. W. Fischer (Eds.), Self-conscious emotions: The 
psychology of shame, guilt, embarrassment, and pride (pp. 439-464). 
New York: Guilford Press. 
Kluckhohn, C. (1954). Culture and behavior. In G. Lindzey (Ed.), 
Handbook of social psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 921-976). Cambridge, 
MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Kroeber, A. L., & Kluckhohn, C. (1952). Culture: Critical review of 
concepts and definitions (Vol. 1, No. 1). Cambridge, MA: Peabody 
Museum. 
Krueger, J., & Clement, R. W. (1994). The truly false consensus effect: 
An ineradicable egocentric bias in social perception. Journal of Per- 
sonality and Social Psychology, 67, 596-610. 
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1991). Culture and self: Implications 
for cognition, emotion, and motivation. Psychological Review, 98, 224- 
253. 
Markus, H. R., & Kitayama, S. (1994). A collective fear of the collective: 
Implications for selves and theories of selves. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 20, 568-579. 
Miller, J. G. (1994). Cultural diversity in the morality of caring: Indi- 
vidually-oriented versus duty-oriented interpersonal codes. Cross- 
Cultural Research, 28, 3-39. 
Mills, J., & Clark, M. S. (1982). Exchange and communal relationships. 
In L. Wheeler (Ed.), Review of personality and social psychology (Vol. 
3, pp. 121-144). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 
Mullen, B., Atkins, J. L., Champion, D. S., Edwards, C., Handy, D., 
Story, J. E., & Vanderklok, M. (1985). The false consensus effect: A 
meta-analysis of I 15 hypothesis tests. Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 21, 262-283. 
Murdock, G. P. (1945). The common denominator of culture. In R. 
Linton (Ed.), The science of man in the world crisis (pp. 51-69). New 
York: Columbia University Press. 
Oettingen, G. (1995). Cross-cultural perspectives on self-efficacy. In A. 
Bandura (Ed.), Self-efflcacy in changing societies (pp. 149-176). New 
York: Cambridge University Press. 
Oettingen, G., Little, T. D., Lindenberger, U., & Baltes, P. B. (1994). 
Causality, agency, and control beliefs in East versus West Berlin chil- 
dren: A natural experiment on the role of context. Journal of Per- 
sonality and Social Psychology, 66, 579-595. 
Pelto, P. J., & Pelto, G. H. (1975). Intra-cultural diversity: Some theo- 
retical issues. American Ethnologist, 2, 1-18. 
Reykowski, J. (1994). Collectivism and individualism as dimensions of 
social change. In U. Kim, H. C. Triandis, C. Kagitcibasi, S-C. Choi, 
& G. Yoon (Eds.), Individualism and collectivism: Theory, method, 
and applications (pp. 276-292). Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
Rhee, E., Uleman, J. S., Lee, H. K., & Roman, R. J. (1995). Spontaneous 
self-descriptions and ethnic identities in individualistic and collectivist 
cultures. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 142-152. 
Robinson, R. J., Keltner, D., Ward, A., & Ross, L. (1995). Actual versus 
assumed differences in construal: "Naive realism" in intergroup per- 
ception and conflict. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
68, 404-417. 
Rokeach, M. (1973). The nature of human values. New York: Basic 
Books. 
Scheper-Hughes, N. (1985). Culture, scarcity, and maternal thinking: 
Maternal detachment and infant survival in a Brazilian shantytown. 
Ethos, 13, 291-317. 
Schneider, D. (1968). American kinship: A cultural account. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Schwartz, S. H. (1990). Individualism-collectivism. Critique and pro- 
posed refinements. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 21, 139- 
157. 
Schwartz, S. H. (1992). Universals in the content and structure of values: 
Theoretical advances and empirical tests in 20 countries. In M. Zanna 
(Ed.), Advances in experimental socialpsychology (Vol. 25, pp. 1-66). 
New York: Academic Press. 
Schwartz, S. H. (1994). Beyond individualism and collectivism: New 
cultural dimensions of values. In U. Kim, H. C. Triandis, C. Kagit- 
cibasi, S-C. Choi, & G. Yoon (Eds.), Individualism and collectivism: 
Theory, method, and applications (pp. 85-122). Newbury Park, CA: 
Sage. 
Shweder, R., & LeVine, R. A. (1984). Culture theory. Essays on mind, 
self, and emotion. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
Singelis, T., Triandis, H. C., Bhawuk, D., & Gelfand, M. (1995). Hori- 
zontal and vertical individualism and collectivism: A theoretical and 
methodological refinement. Cross-Cultural Psychology,, 29, 240-275. 
April 1996 • American Psychologist 
413 
Skinner, B. F. (1981). Selection by consequences. Science, 213, 501- 
504. 
Smith, P. B., Dugan, S., & Trompenaars, E (in press). National culture 
and managerial values: A dimensional analysis across 43 nations. 
Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology. 
Spiro, M. E. (1951). Culture and personality: The natural history of a 
false dichotomy. Psychiatry, 14, 19-46. 
Thibaut, J. W., & Kelley, H. H. (1959). The social psychology of groups. 
New York: Wiley. 
Trafimow, D., Triandis, H. C., & Goto, S. (1991). Some tests of the 
distinction between private self and collective self. Journal of Person- 
ality and Social Psychology, 60. 649-655. 
Triandis, H. C. (1972). The analysis of subjective culture. New York: Wiley. 
Triandis, H. C. (1988). Collectivism v. individualism: A reconceptual- 
ization of a basic concept in cross-cultural social psychology. In G. K. 
Verma & C. Bagley (Eds.), Cross-cultural studies of personality, at- 
titudes and cognition (pp. 60-95). London: Macmillan. 
Triandis, H. C. (1989). The self and social behavior in differing cultural 
contexts. Psychological Review, 96, 506-520. 
Triandis, H. C. (1990). Cross-cultural studies of individualism and col- 
lectivism. In J. Berman (Ed.), Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, 
1989 (pp. 41-133). Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 
Triandis, H. C. (1993). Collectivism and individualism as cultural syn- 
dromes. Cross-Cultural Research, 27, 155-180. 
Triandis, H. C. (1994). Culture and social behavior. New York: McGraw- 
Hill. 
Triandis, H. C. (1995). Individualism and collectivism. Boulder, CO: 
Westview Press. 
Triandis, H. C. (in press). A cross-cultural perspective on social psy- 
chology. In C. McGarty & A. Haslam (Eds.), The message of social 
psychology: Perspectives on mind and society. Oxford, England: 
Blackwell. 
Triandis, H. C., Bontempo, R., Betancourt, H., Bond, M., Leung, K., 
Brenes, A., G-eorgas, J., Hui, C. H., Matin, G., Setiadi, B., Sinha, J. B. P., 
Verma, J., Spangenberg, J., Touzard, H., & de Montmollin, G. (1986). 
The measurement of eric aspects of individualism and collectivism across 
cultures. Australian Journal of Psychology, 38, 257-267. 
Triandis, H. C., Bontempo, R., Leung, K., & Hui, C. K. (1990). A 
method for determining cultural, demographic, and personal con- 
structs. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 21, 302-318. 
Triandis, H. C., Bontempo, R., Villareal, M. J, Asai, M., & Lucca, N. 
(1988). Individualism and collectivism: Cross-cultural perspectives 
on self-ingroup relationships. Journal of Personality and Social Psy- 
chology, 54, 323-338. 
Triandis, H. C., Brislin, R., & Hui, C. H. (1988). Cross-cultural training 
across the individualism-collectivism divide. International Journal 
of lntercultural Relations, 12, 269-289. 
Triandis, H. C., Leung, K., Villareal, M., & Clack, E L. (1985). Allo- 
centric vs. idiocentric tendencies: Convergent and discriminant vali- 
dation. Journal of Research in Personality, 19, 395-415. 
Triandis, H. C., McCusker, C., & Hui, C. H. (1990). Multimethod probes 
of individualism and collectivism. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 59, 1006-1020. 
Turnbull, C. M. (1972). The mountain people. New York: Simon & 
Schuster. 
United Nations. (1994). World social situation in the 1990s. New York: 
Author. 
Weldon, E. (1984). Deindividuation, interpersonal affect, and productivity 
in laboratory task groups. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 14, 
469-485. 
Appendix A 
Four Cultural Patterns 
Dimension/study 
Collectivism 
Individualism 
Vertical self 
Different from others 
Markus & Kitayama (1991 ) 
Interdependent 
Independent 
Communal sharing 
Market pricing 
Fiske (1992) 
Rokeach (1973) 
Low freedom 
Communalism 
(e.g., Indian village) 
+ Authority ranking 
Low equality 
High freedom 
Market democracy 
(e.g., United States) 
Horizontal self 
Same as others 
Fiske I1992) 
Communal sharing 
Market pricing 
+ Equality matching 
Rokeach (1973) 
High equality 
tow freedom 
Communal living 
(e.g., Kibbutz) 
High freedom 
Democratic socialism 
(e.g., Sweden) 
414 
April 1996 • American Psychologist 
Appendix B 
Items for the Measurement of Horizontal and Vertical Individualism 
and Collectivism 
Vertical Individualism (a = .82) 
It annoys me when other people perform better than I do. 
Competition is the law of nature. 
When another person does better than I do, I get tense and aroused. 
Without competition, it is not possible to have a good society. 
Winning is everything. 
It is important that I do my job better than others. 
I enjoy working in situations involving competition with others. 
Some people emphasize winning; I'm not one of them (and vice 
versa) 
Horizontal Individualism (a = .81 ) 
I often do "my own thing." 
Being a unique individual is important to me. 
I'd rather depend on myself than on others. 
I rely on myself most of the time; I rarely rely on others. 
My personal identity, independent from others, is very important to 
me. 
I am a unique person, separate from others. 
I enjoy being unique and different from others. 
Vertical Collectivism (a = .73) 
I would do what would please my family, even if I detested that 
activity. 
I usually sacrifice my self-interest for the benefit of my group. 
We should keep our aging parents with us at home. 
I would sacrifice an activity that I enjoy very much if my family did 
not approve of it. 
Children should be taught to place duty before pleasure. 
It is important to me that I respect the decisions made by my groups. 
Self-sacrifice is a virtue. 
It annoys me if I have to sacrifice activities that I enjoy to help others 
(reverse scoring). 
Horizontal Collectivism (a = .80) 
The well-being of my coworkers is important to me. 
If a coworker gets a prize, I would feel proud. 
If a relative were in financial difficulty, I would help within my means. 
It is important to me to maintain harmony within my group. 
I like sharing little things with my neighbors. 
It is important to consult close friends and get their ideas before 
making a decision. 
Note. 
From "Horizontal and Vertical Individualism and Collectivism: A Theoretical and Methodological Refinement" (Table 4), by T. Singelis, 
H. C. Triandis, D. Bhawuk, and M. Gelfand, 1995, Cross-CulturalPsychology, 29, pp. 240-275. Copyright 1995 by Sage Publications, Inc. Reprinted 
with permission. 
Appendix C 
Examples of Scenarios Used in the Study Mentioned in the Text 
1. Which of the following activities are likely to be most satisfying to 
you? 
A. thinking about yourself- 
B. doing your duty, as expected of you by important groups _ 
C. linking with others _ 
D. beating your competitors _ 
2. In your opinion, in an ideal society, national budgets will be 
determined so that 
A. all people have adequate incomes to meet basic 
needs _ 
B. some people will be rewarded for making brilliant contributions 
C. there will be maximum stability, law, and order _ 
D. people can feel unique and self-actualized _ 
April 1996 • American Psychologist 
415 
